
SOURCES
•
I. Principal sources for biblical texts
A. Genesis through Deuteronomy: The Five Books of Moses, new edition,
revised by Dr. M. Stern, Star Hebrew Book Company, undated.
B. For latest translation and interpretation based on Sumerian and Akkadian
finds: "Genesis," from The Anchor Bible, trans. by E. A. Speiser, Garden
City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Co., 1964.
C. For "archaic" flavor: The Holy Bible, King James Version, Cleveland and
New York: The World Publishing Co., undated.
D. For verification of recent interpretations of biblical verses: The Torah,
new translation of the Holy Scriptures according to the Masoretic text,
New York: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1962; The New
American Bible, translation by members of the Catholic Biblical
Association of America, New York: P. J. Kenedy & Sons, 1970; and The
New English Bible, planned and directed by the Church of England,
Oxford: Oxford University Press; Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1970.
E. For reference on usage comparison and translation aids: Veteris
Testamenti Concordantiae Hebraicae Atque Chaldaicae by Solomon
Mandelkern, Jerusalem: Schocken Books, Inc., 1962; Encyclopedic
Dictionary of the Bible, a translation and adaptation of the work by A. van
den Born, by the Catholic Biblical Association of America, New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., 1963; and Millon-Hatanach (Hebrew),
Hebrew-Aramaic by Jushua Steinberg, Tel Aviv: Izreel Publishing House
Ltd., 1961.
II. Principal sources for Near Eastern texts
Barton, George A. The Royal Inscriptions of Sumer and Akkad. 1929.
Borger, Riekele. Babylonisch-Assyrisch Lesestucke. 1963. Budge, E. A.
Wallis. The Gods of the Egyptians. 1904.
Budge, E. A. W., and King, L. W. Annals of the Kings of Assyria. 1902.
Chiera, Edward. Sumerian Religious Texts. 1924.
Ebeling, E.; Meissner, B.; and Weidner, E. (eds.). Reallexikon der
Assyrologie und Vorderasiatischen Archiiology. 1932-1957.
Ebeling, Erich. Enuma Elish: die Siibente Tafel des Akkadischen
Weltschapfungsliedes. 1939.
___. Tad und Leben nach den Vorstellungen der Babylonier. 1931.
Falkenstein, Adam, and W. von Soden. Sumerische und Akkadische Hymnen
und Gebete. 1953.
Falkenstein, Adam. Sumerische Goetterlieder. 1959.
Fossey, Charles. La Magie Syrienne. 1902.
Frankfort, Henri. Kingship and the Gods. 1948.
Gray, John. The Cananites. 1964.
Gordon, Cyrus H. "Canaanite Mythology" in Mythologies of the Ancient
World. 1961.
Grossman, Hugo. The Development of the Idea of God in the Old Testament.
1926.
___.Altorientalische Texte und Bilder zum alten Testamente. 1909.
Giiterbock, Hans G. "Hittite Mythology" in Mythologies of the Ancient
World. 1961.
Heidel, Alexander. The Babylonian Genesis. 1969.
Hilprecht, Herman V. (ed.). Reports of the Babylonian Expedition:
Cuneiform Texts. 1893-1914.
Jacobsen, Thorkild. "Mesopotamia" in The Intellectual Adventure of the
Ancient Man. 1946.
Jastrow, Morris. Die Religion Babyloniens und Assyriens. 1905-12.
Jean, Charles-F. La religion sumerienne. 1931.
Jensen, P. Texte zur assyrisch-babylonischen Religion. 1915.
___.Die Kosmologie der Babylonier. 1890.
Jeremias, Alfred. The Old Testament in the Light of the Ancient Near East.
1911.
___. Das Alter der babylonischen Astronomie. 1908.
___. Handbuch der Altorientalische Geistkultur.
Jeremias, Alfred, and Winckler, Hugo. lm Kampfe um den alten Orient.
King, Leonard W. Babylonian Magic and Sorcery, being "The Prayers of
the Lifting of the Hand." 1896.
___. The Assyrian Language. 1901.
___. The Seven Tablets of Creation. 1902.
___. Babylonian Religion and Mythology. 1899.
Kramer, Samuel N. The Sumerians. 1963.
___. (ed.): Mythologies of the Ancient World. 1961.
___. History Begins at Sumer. 1959.
___. Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta. 1952.
___. From the Tablets of Sumer. 1956.
___. Sumerian Mytlwlogy. 1961.
Kugler, Fra.nz Xaver. Sternkunde und Sterndienst in Babylon. 1907-1913.
Lambert, W. G., and Millard, A. R. Atra-Hasis, the Babylonian Story of the
Flood. 1970.
Langdon, Stephen. Sumerian and Babylonian Psalms. 1909.
___. Tammuz and Ishtar. 1914.
___. (ed.): Oxford Editions of Cuneiform Texts. 1923 ff.
___. "Semitic Mythology" in The Mythology of All Races. 1964.
___. Enuma Elish: The Babylonian Epic of Creation. 1923.
___. Babylonian Penitential Psalms. 1927.
___. Die Neu-Babylonischen Ki'migsinschriften. 1912.
Luckenbill, David D. Ancient Records of Assyria and Babylonia. 1926-27.
Neugebauer, O. Astronomical Cuneiform Texts. 1955.
Pinches, Theophilus G. "Some Mathematical Tablets in the British Museum"
in Hilprecht Anniversary Volume. 1909.
Pritchard, James B. (ed.). Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old
Testament. 1969.
Rawlinson, Henry C. The Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia. 1861-84.
Sayce, A. H. The Religion of the Babylonians. 1888.
Smith, George. The Chaldean Account of Genesis. 1876.
Thomas, D. Winton (ed.). Documents from Old Testament Times. 1961.
Thompson, R. Campbell. The Reports of the Magicians and Astrologers of
Nineveh and Babylon. 1900.
Thureau-Dangin, Francois. Les Inscriptions de Sumer et Akkad. 1905.
___. Die sumerischen und akkadische KOnigsinschriften. 1907.
___. Rituels accadiens. 1921.
Virolleaud, Charles. L'Astronomie Chaldeenne. 1903-1908.
Weidner, Ernst F. Alter und Bedeutung der Babylonischer Astronomie und
Astrallehre. 1914.
___. Handbuch der Babylonischen Astronomie. 1915.
Witzel, P. Maums. Tammuz-Liturgien und Verwandtes. 1935.
Ill. Studies and articles consulted in various issues of the following
periodicals
Der Alte Orient (Leipzig)
American Journal of Archaeology (Concord, Mass.)
American Journal of Semitic Languages and Literatures (Chicago)
Annual of the American Schools of Oriental Research (New Haven)
Archiv fur Keilschriftforschung (Berlin)
Archiv fur Orientforschung (Berlin)
Archiv Orientalni (Prague)
Assyrologische Bibliothek (Leipzig)
Assyrological Studies (Chicago)
Das Ausland (Berlin) Babyloniaca (Paris)
Beitrage zur Assyrologie und semitischen Sprachwissenschaft (Leipzig)
Berliner Beitriige zur Keilschriftforschung (Berlin)
Bibliotheca Orientalis (Leiden)
Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research (Jemsalem and
Baghdad)
Deutsches Morgenliindische Gesellschaft, Abhandlungen (Leipzig)
Harvard Semitic Series (Cambridge, Mass.)
Hebrew Union College Annual (Cincinnati)
Journal Asiatique (Paris)
Journal of the American Oriental Society (New Haven)
Journal of Biblical Literature and Exegesis (Middletown).
Journal of Cuneiform Studies (New Haven)
Journal of Near Eastern Studies (Chicago)
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (London)
Journal of the Society of Oriental Research (Chicago)
Journal of Semitic Studies (Manchester)
Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek (Berlin)
Konigliche Museen zu Berlin: Mitteilungen am der Orientalischen
Sammlungen (Berlin)
Leipziger semitische Studien (Leipzig)
Mitteilungen der altorientalischen Gesellschaft (Leipzig)
Mitteilungen des Instituts fur Orientforschung (Berlin)
Orientalia (Rome)
Orientalische Literaturzeitung (Berlin)
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society (Philadelphia)
Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaeology (London)
Revue d'Assyrologie et d'archeologie orientale (Paris)
Revue biblique (Paris)
Sacra Scriptura Antiquitatibus Orientalibus Illustrata (Vatican)
Studia Orientalia (Helsinki)
Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archaeology (London)
Untersuchungen zur Assyrologie und vorderasiatischen Archiiologie
(Berlin)
Vorderasiatische Bibliothek (Leipzig)
Die Welt des Orients (Gottingen)
Wissenschaftliche Veroffehtlichungen der deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft
(Berlin)
Zeitschrift fur Assyrologie und verwandte Gebiete (Leipzig)
Zeitschrift fur die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft (Berlin, Gissen)
Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenliindischen Gesellschaft (Leipzig)
Zeitschrift fur Keilschriftforschung (Leipzig)
Other Works by Zecharia Sitchin
THE LOST BOOK OF ENKI
DIVINE ENCOUNTERS
GENESIS REVISITED
THE EARTH CHRONICLES:
Book I: The 12th Planet
Book II: The Stairway to Heaven
Book III: The Wars of Gods and Men
Book IV: The Lost Realms
Book V: When Time Began
Book VI: The Cosmic Code
Dear Reader,
The Earth Chronicles series is based on the premise that mythology is the
depository of ancient recollections, that the Bible should be read literally as
a historic-scientific document, and that ancient civilizations were the product
of knowledge brought to Earth by the Anunnaki—"Those who from Heaven
to Earth came."
Complementing each other and serving to bring the saga of gods and
humans on Earth ever closer to our time, each book of the series looks at this
awesome tale from a different perspective.
The 12th Planet, the first book of the series, brings to life the Sumerian
civilization and presents millennia-old evidence of the existence of Nibiru,
the home planet of the Anunnaki, and the landings of the Anunnaki on Earth
every 3,600 years.
The Stairway to Heaven, the second book, incorporates ancient Egyptian
evidence to show that the gateway between the mortal and the divine was a
spaceport in the Sinai Peninsula, with the Giza pyramids and the Sphinx
serving as beacons for the landings.
The Wars of Gods and Men, the third book, additionally embraces
Canaanite, Hittite, and Hindu sources to include in these investigations the
incidents of the Tower of Babel and the upheaval of Sodom and Gomorrah,
concluding that nuclear weapons were used on Earth 4,000 years ago.
The Lost Realms, the fourth book, transports readers to the pre-Columbian
civilizations and ancient empires of the Americas, revealing hitherto
unrecognized golden links between ancient Near Eastern civilizations and the
"cities of the gods" of the Olmecs, Mayas, Aztecs, and Incas.
When Time Began, the fifth book, explores ancient knowledge of Heaven
and Earth and the interwoven cycles that gave rise to astronomy, the zodiac
and astrology, and stone calendars such as Stonehenge, revealing the secret
of New Ages past and future.
And The Cosmic Code, the sixth book in the series, explains how the
secrets of humankind's celestial teachers were encoded in the Bible and other
sacred and hidden "books "—a cosmic code that links Earthlings to their
cosmic roots.
In the years since each book was published, new scientific discoveries
have provided mounting corroboration of the series' incredible and
unorthodox science-based conclusions. This accumulation of discoveries and
the origins of humankind and the solar system are further discussed in the
companion books Genesis Revisited and Divine Encounters.
I trust that modern science will continue to confirm ancient knowledge.
Zecharia Sitchin
New York
January 2002
About the Author
Zecharia Sitchin was born in Russia and grew up in Palestine, where he
acquired a profound knowledge of modern and ancient Hebrew, other
Semitic and European languages, the Old Testament, and the history and
archaeology of the Near East. A graduate of the University of London with a
degree in economic history, he worked as a journalist and editor for many
years prior to undertaking his life's work—The Earth Chronicles.
One of the few scholars able to read the clay tablets and interpret ancient
Sumerian and Akkadian, Sitchin based The Earth Chronicles series on the
texts and pictorial evidence recorded by the ancient civilizations of the Near
East, His books have been widely translated, reprinted in paperback
editions, converted to Braille for the blind, and featured on radio and
television programs. He now lives and writes in New York City.
About Inner Traditions • Bear & Company
Founded in 1975, Inner Traditions is a leading publisher of books on
indigenous cultures, perennial philosophy, visionary art, spiritual traditions
of the East and West, sexuality, holistic health and healing, self-development,
as well as recordings of ethnic music and accompaniments for meditation.
In July 2000, Bear & Company joined with Inner Traditions and moved
from Santa Fe, New Mexico, where it was founded in 1980, to Rochester,
Vermont. Together Inner Traditions • Bear & Company have eleven imprints:
Inner Traditions, Bear & Company, Healing Arts Press, Destiny Books, Park
Street Press, Bindu Books, Bear Cub Books, Destiny Recordings, Destiny
Audio Editions, Inner Traditions en Español, and Inner Traditions India.
For more information or to browse through our more than one thousand
titles in print, visit www.InnerTraditions.com.
Bear & Company
One Park Street
Rochester, Vermout 05767
www.InnerTraditions.com
Bear & Company is a division of Inner Traditions International
Copyright © 1976, 1978, 1991 by Zecharia Sitchin
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Sitchin, Zecharia.
The 12th planet / Zecharia Sitchin.
p. cm. — (The first book of the Earth chronicles)
Reprint. Originally published: New York: Stein and Day, 1976.
Includes bibliographical references.
eISBN-13: 978-1-59143-919-6
1. Civilization, Ancient—Extraterrestrial influences. 2. Interplanetary
voyages. I. Title. II. Title: Twelfth planet. III. Series: Sitchin, Zecharia. Earth
chronicles :1.
CB156.S57 1991
001.9'4-dc20
91-7904
CIP

Electronic edition produced by
ePubNow!
www.epubnow.com
www.digitalmediainitiatives.com