Prologue
It is 7.17 am. Eastern Standard Time, on the thirtieth of June 1994.
Suddenly the power fails.
The basement centre of the Defense Communication Operations Unit
adjoining the White House is plunged into darkness, and only the
distant rumble of early morning traffic reminds the duty officer that
another day has already begun. There have been power failures
before, however, and there is no hint of impending crisis.
Almost immediately, an automatic switch brings in the emergency
supply. But now the duty officer observes that something is wrong.
Telephone links to the outside world have gone. These include the
open links, via commercial cables, to NORAD’s bunker a thousand
feet under Cheyenne Peak in Colorado, and to the Offutt command
post near Omaha.
Within seconds it is ascertained that neither the President nor
VicePresident, both of whom are out of town, can be contacted: radio
communications are blacked out, on all frequencies. Further,
because of the telephone failure, none of the Presidential stand-ins
scattered around town and country can be expected to call in to give
their exact locations, as they would normally if there were a
recognized national emergency. However, the Secretary of Defense,
third in the chain of command, is at breakfast somewhere in the
White House.
It has taken 45 seconds to confirm the general breakdown of
communications; it takes another 45 seconds to locate the Secretary
of Defense and inform him of the problem; and it is another 90
seconds before the Secretary finds himself in the cramped underground Situation Room along with his advisors. He is aware that the
travel time of a missile from a hostile submarine off the Atlantic
coast to Washington is just over fifteen minutes; three of these
minutes have gone.
Emergency procedures for transferring authority are now in hand
and the Secretary of Defense becomes in effect the new President.
The ‘gold codes’, which would enable him to initiate a nuclear
response, are placed before him. The black STOP books with their
theoretical scenarios are produced. The ‘Mystic’ and ‘Nationwide’
communication systems are successfully activated utilizing deeply
buried, protected cables. He now has control of the National
Command Authority, the channel of communication for execution of
a nuclear strike; and another two minutes have gone.
The underground cables to Cheyenne, Offutt and other SAC bases are
now open with secure links to the radar lines covering northern
approaches. None of them — Dew Line, the 55th Parallel or Pine
Tree — is functioning properly, however; their screens are strongly
upset with many spurious signals: there seem to be huge scattering
modes in the ionosphere. Satellite communication with military
forces abroad is impaired. No information is coming from the big
synchronous DSP satellites over South America, the central Pacific or
the Indian Ocean; nothing is arriving from the relay stations near
Aurora in Colorado or Pine Gap in Australia. And the ‘hot line’ is
dead. On the other hand in the minutes before the confusion they
had reported no anomalous infrared emissions and hence no
evidence of heat from the exhausts of rising missiles. At the moment
all that can be said is that there is a very unusual atmospheric
disturbance, that telephone lines are dead and that there are
widespread power failures. The disturbed atmosphere might just be
some strange effect due to sunspots or the like, but the telephone and
power failures are ominous. On such a scale, the only plausible
explanation is an electromagnetic pulse caused by nuclear fireballs.
Eight minutes into the emergency — if it is an emergency — the
Secretary issues a number of precautionary orders. His deputy is
ordered upstairs to await the arrival of a helicopter from Quantico
Marine Corps base about 30 miles away. This will transport the
deputy to the waiting ‘Nightwatch’, a Boeing 747 which functions as
an airborne command post. Another helicopter is dispatched to
retrieve the President. A ‘flash alert’ is sent to Hawaii, to get a second
command post aloft, but the message goes unacknowledged. SAC
missile silos and bomber bases are put on full alert.
Nine minutes on, information begins to flood in from sensors and
antennae in orbit, at sea and scattered round the Earth. Much of it is
reassuring: there are no patterns of activity on land, sea or air
consistent with hostile intentions, no evacuations of barracks or the
like are in progress. But now something deeply disturbing is coming
in from one of the DSP satellites. A television screen shows a brilliant
patch over south-east Nevada, bright enough to saturate the lead
sulphide cells in the satellite. Intense heat is radiating from an area
of about ten thousand square kilometers. Distant ground sensors are
reporting large tremors emanating from the same
area — unnecessarily, as the Situation Room has begun to sway and
vibrate, and loud rumblings are coming up from deep under the
ground. Then, from Offutt, comes devastating news. Air Force pilots
are reporting a huge explosion in the desert area close to Boulder
City. The city itself has gone, reduced to rubble. Las Vegas and other
towns within 100 miles are enveloped in huge firestorms. The
Hoover Dam has disintegrated. A column of dust and rubble has
been sucked up to great altitude and a mushroom cloud is spreading
outwards. Huge amounts of smoke are blanketing the state of
Arizona and spreading into New Mexico itself. The Secretary and his
advisors can see it all on their television screens.
The Secretary now has a maximum of five minutes in which to
discuss and evaluate the information, make any decisions and
implement them. He is informed that the damage corresponds to
explosions amounting to at least twenty megatons, and must have
been caused by more than one bomb. The possibility of accidental
detonations is quickly ruled out, because of its technical
improbability and the magnitude of the explosion. Further, he is told
that both ground and air bursts must have been involved to disrupt
both cable and ionospheric communications. The conclusion seems
unavoidable that for some reason the Soviets have targeted bombs
on to American territory giving somehow circumvented military
radars. Perhaps armed satellites with low radar cross-section have
suddenly been diverted downwards; or perhaps submarine-launched
cruise missiles have been fired; or perhaps bombs had already been
smuggled into the area. But why? The desert is a bizarre choice of
target, Boulder, Las Vegas and the Hoover Dam of low strategic
value. No sense can be made of the attack. Perhaps, it is suggested,
they were chosen because they have little value. The attack may be a
prelude to some major military adventure and may be a warning,
‘keep out’ notice pitched at a level low enough that the risks of
nuclear response are not justified and yet high enough to
demonstrate deadly earnest. Or, the impacts may be intended to
disrupt radar and communications for reasons which can only be
guessed at.
Whatever the merits of such speculations, the Secretary cannot
responsibly rule out the possibility that further bombs may follow,
completely jamming command and control over nuclear weapons, or
even that Washington is an imminent target whose destruction
might for example be awaiting only the positioning of armed
satellites, already in orbit, over the city, or the arrival of cruise
missiles. Twelve minutes into the emergency, the Secretary’s deputy
is still on the White House lawn waiting for a helicopter, there is no
communication with the President and the only information still
coming in confirms that towns over several thousand square miles
have been destroyed in nuclear blasts. He has no time left and must
come to an immediate decision.
He could initiate the dreaded ‘Major Attack Option’. This is quickly
ruled out because it is beyond reason, leading only to mutual
annihilation. He could choose to do nothing. But it is pointed out
that in the present situation paralysis could also lead to holocaust.
Whether the National Command Authority is ‘decapitated’ in the
next few minutes depends on whether further missiles are about to
land. If they are, then all control over the counter-strike force may be
lost and, with bombs falling on the USA, a full-scale attack on the
Soviet Union will, following standing instructions, be unleashed by
individual submarine commanders, and by the one star generals
aboard their Cover All airborne command posts. It is therefore vital
to forestall any further nuclear attacks by calling the bluff, that is by
retaliating at a similar level. All the options are dangerous. The least
dangerous is an immediate ‘controlled response’.
The discussions are interrupted by confused reports of a storm of
missiles, a cataract of fire pouring in over the states of the western
seaboard and Canada. But the reports go unconfirmed; again,
communications are failing over the whole of the United States.
It is 7:30 am. Eastern Standard Time, on the thirtieth of June, in the
revamped over-the-horizon radar base near Gomel in Byelo-Russia
officers are horrified to see, through the confusion of the still
disturbed ionosphere, a dozen missile tracks appealing on their
screens. Peacekeepers are rising over the plains of Kansas ...
Even as they look, however, another unheralded missile is
encountering the atmosphere high over the Bernese Oberland.
Coming in at sixty thousand miles an hour, a hundred kilometers
above Interlaken, the missile is gathering around itself a narrow skin
of compressed air whose temperature surges up to about half a
million degrees. Waves ripple within the hot air-turned-plasma;
atoms, scattering off the waves, reach huge speeds, collide violently,
and are stripped to their nuclei; electrons, torn from the atoms.
Accelerate violently and radiate fiercely at all wavelengths. For the
most part this fierce emission is invisible, hard ultraviolet light or
soft X-rays, and the atmosphere absorbs these at altitude, 50 to 90
kilometers up. Only a tiny fraction of the radiation reaches the
ground as visible light. Even so, Europe is lit up as if with a
flashbulb: survivors from Ireland to Austria and from Denmark to
Italy later describe’ a bluish white light, too bright for the naked eye’,
or ‘a fire brighter than the Sun’, or ‘a thunderbolt ... blinding in its
intensity’. Approaching from the south east, the missile passes on a
long, shallow trajectory, throwing moving shadows over the
Jungfrau, Berne and Basle. It crosses the sky in a few seconds,
leaving a wake of hot, luminous debris and air surrounded by a
rapidly expanding red trail. Ten seconds after its first encounter with
the atmosphere, the missile has penetrated the ionosphere, passed
though the stratosphere and is moving rapidly into the lower
atmosphere.
Here at an altitude between 10 and 15 kilometers, the missile hits
scientifically denser air and suddenly disintegrates. It never reaches
the ground therefore and instead unloads its stored-up power, 200
megatons of impact energy, into the air over Louvain, a mediumsized town in central Belgium. The missile vaporizes in a third of a
second. It is now, momentarily, an incandescent cylinder a few
kilometers long and a few hundred meters across. The temperature
within the cylinder is over 100, 000° C. The pressure for an instant
reaches some tens of thousands of tons per square inch; the missile
blows up into a ball of fire radiating X-rays of huge intensity. These
are absorbed within a few meters by the surrounding air, but, in
doing so, the envelope of atmospheric gas acquires their energy.
Simultaneously, hot, compressed material is thrusting rapidly
outwards from the point of disintegration and snowploughing the air
ahead of it. A blast wave develops; the fireball expands. From the
first trace of incandescent tail high over Interlaken, to the beginnings
of the fireball over Louvain, less than eleven seconds have elapsed.
When the fireball has reached about four miles in diameter the shock
wave breaks away and races ahead of it. The corresponding blast
brings a wind speed of over a thousand miles an hour. Survival at
this distance is impossible; Louvain, directly under the fireball,
disappears in less than a second. The fireball meanwhile inflates and
soars rapidly upwards for several kilometers until, in the
stratosphere; it flattens out and takes the classical mushroom shape.
The cloud is seen from Copenhagen to Florence, from Edinburgh to
Budapest. And over the whole of Europe, the ground shakes and
buildings sway dangerously. Trains are derailed in southern England
and beneath the Channel. The mushroom cloud is quickly broken up
by jet streams at about 60 kilometers altitude and is subsequently
dispersed around the globe.
Within 25 kilometers of Louvain, all buildings are reduced to rubble.
A few girder bridges survive due to accidental cancellation of
pressure waves from above and below. The shock wave reaches
Brussels to the west and Liege to the east. The buildings within these
cities collapse, domino-like, as the wave sweeps through; and all
traces of roads are immediately erased by rubble. Beyond 25
kilometers, some structures survive, although few houses remain
intact. Throughout Antwerp, for example, about 50 kilometers from
ground zero, roofs are stripped bare of tiles and window frames and
doors are blown in. Beyond this the damage becomes lighter: about
100 kilometers to the north the blast, sweeping through Eindhoven,
blows tiles off roofs and shatters windows.
People out of doors and 25 kilometers from Louvain are hurled about
10 meters and are usually killed. Flying glass, though, is the greatest
hazard. Shopping precincts and office complexes within 50
kilometers find themselves swept without warning by lethal blizzards
of flying glass. Indeed, shards of glass account for most of the loss of
life in these areas. Even 100 kilometers from the epicenter of the
explosion, the blast is still strong enough to flatten forests.
Nuclear reactors within reach of the ground tremors and air waves
are damaged, their coolant pipes snapped and containment vessels
cracked. Some begin the process of meltdown. Already, swathes of
radioactive debris are pouring into the atmosphere, mingling with
the dense chemical smog, drifting into Germany, and destined for
Poland and Scandinavia.
Immense destruction is caused by fire as well as blast. Serious flash
burns from the thermal pulse of the fireball are sustained over an
area of several thousands square kilometers, and virtually all
exposed individuals within about 50 kilometers of ground zero
receive third degree burns (charred skin) requiring labour-intensive
hospital treatment, but in the hours and days following the impact it
is impossible for medical services from outside to reach, let alone
cope with, the seriously burned, and many of the injured die
untreated from shock within twelve hours.
The intense heat from the rising fireball sets off fires at a range of 70
kilometres or more. Fanned by the updraft of air sucked in behind
the rising ball, these merge into a mass fire, a single all-consuming
conflagration. Such fire services as have survived are immobilized in
a sea of debris, deprived of water and overwhelmed by the extent of
the raging fire. The Sun eventually sets, but Europe is already dark,
only the light from raging fires penetrates the smoke.
Sixteen hours after the event the Sun rises again, but it shines down
only on a dense, choking smog created by blazing cities and
petrochemical complexes. Aerial survey is impossible. Within a circle
of radius 50 kilometres, the dead greatly outnumber the living. Even
without the mass fire which is still blazing, penetration of the area is
impossible as roads are strewn by debris and wrecked vehicles. It will
be several days before the fires burn themselves out and the smog
disperses enough to reveal the flattened cities and towns, villages
and farms. Belgium, it will turn out, has been obliterated. And
several weeks would need to pass before French, German and Dutch
forces have the capacity to clear the roads, shelter the living and bury
the dead.
Belgium, however, will wait in vain ...
For the Earth has encountered a cosmic swarm. Twelve hours late,
the death-dealing fusillade is peppering the other side of the globe.
Indeed, the bombardment continues for nearly a night and day, the
planet rotating all the while, first presenting one face, then the other,
until eventually it emerges on the far side of the swarm. Compared
with the fireball over Hiroshima at the end of the Second World War,
that over Boulder was a thousand times greater whilst that over
Louvain was ten times bigger again, but they are just two of the
several hundred pieces of grape-shot that meet the Earth, and they
are trivial compared larger pieces of ordnance in train. These rarer
missiles are each capable of unloading as much energy as would be
unleashed in a major nuclear war, and in their case the atmosphere
provides relatively little protection. Thus unlike their smaller
counterparts, these larger bodies get through to the surface of the
Earth, an ocean impact generating a tsunami, a land impact
generating a small crater. There is another difference: each huge
fireball is now too energetic to be properly contained by the
atmosphere. As before, it ascends, laden with dust, but now it breaks
though generating a vacuum in its wake which is filled by a cast
stream of air. Thus, on the ground, once the initial blast has swept
past, there is a counter flowing hurricane, itself sweeping up dust
thrown up by the impact, and blowing it upwards after the rapidly
receding fireball. Within minutes the fireball has reached an altitude
of several hundred kilometers, in the high stratosphere. Here it
stabilizes, and the dust begins to spill outwards over the top of the
atmosphere.
Closer to the ground, the intense heat of impact from one large
fireball has generated hundreds of fires over an area about the size of
France. Essentially everything combustible along the line of sight of
the rising fireball has caught fire. Loss of life over this area, already
massive from the prompt effects of blast and heat, becomes almost
complete when these fires merge into a single, all-consuming
conflagration. About fifty million tons of smoke pour upwards, in
dense plumes rising to kilometers into the atmosphere.
Within a few days, the wildfires are almost global in extent. Tens of
millions of tons of fine dust lofted into the stratosphere, have spread
over the northern hemisphere and are beginning to cross into the
southern one. At ground level, sunlight is blocked from reaching the
ground, and all activity takes place in a black, choking smog. There is
no question of mounting any rescue operation to save the devastated
areas: the damage is so widespread that communications around the
globe have now effectively ceased to exist; individual regions are
virtually isolated; devastated populations are thrown back on their
own resources; dozens of cities are reduced to smouldering rubble;
river pollution is rife; and forests throughout the world are ablaze.
Life as we know it is drawing to a close.
The cosmic encounter is over. Our planet has finally emerged from
the swarm. Both continue, of course, along their predestined paths,
the swarm merely a few missiles less, the Earth now charred and
encased in a lingering veil of dust and smoke. With the destruction of
cities and urban areas, the infrastructure of civilization has already
gone; with the loss of sunlight, continental land temperatures have
already plummeted to those of a Siberian winter; thick ice covers
rivers and lakes; storms of unprecedented intensity rage along the
continental margins, with animal and plant life devastated, farming
and agriculture have already collapsed. Soon, the disrupted weather
patterns will cause the continental land masses to be blanketed in a
thick covering of snow.
After several months, the Sun begins to be seen trough a hazy sky.
When, eventually, the dust clears, the land masses of the northern
hemisphere are covered in a snowfield which, reflecting sunlight
back into space, has become permanent. The snowfield is added to
each year, centimeters at a time. A thousand years on, North America
and Europe are covered in ice sheets half a mile thick and the ocean
level has dropped by about fifty meters. The Earth is locked into a
new ice age. Mankind has survived, but human population has
crashed and society has dissolved into hungry marauding bands. A
new ecological balance is being worked out on the blasted landscape:
indeed the struggle for survival has only just begun ...
What is to be made of a future that turns out this way? First and
foremost, of course, it must be established whether a true prognosis
has been given; and if not in exact detail, at least in general terms.
Next, should the future be as bleak as it appears, perhaps it must be
recognized that very little can at present be done to remove personal
risk except by fostering such stoical reserves as are necessary to face
the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. But what of culture,
society and civilization? For these also appear to be at risk from the
course of events we describe. Does one perhaps comfort oneself with
the thought that not all would be lost since it is a reasonable
expectation that some archaeologist, thousands of years hence, is
bound to recover the essential achievements of our civilization,
preserved in London, say, beneath a silted-up Thames? Alternatively,
does one perhaps take strength from the known capabilities of the
human race, on the basis, for example, that an engineer or physicist,
also thousands of years hence, is bound once again to invent the
internal combustion engine? Or does one picture a world peopled by
then with a race of Frankenstein monsters, indifferent to all but
themselves? That is, should one envisage a swarm in the sky which is
also the bearer of a cosmic imprint capable of affecting cellular life
and marking out a new small branch in the evolutionary tree? Is
civilization, indeed, simply a cul-de-sac, a diversion before a new
dominant species — ‘homo unsapiens’ we might suppose — inherits
the earth?
Science has no answer to these questions. Indeed, those who might
be expected to contribute to the answer are not at the moment
interested. The environment in which our planet moves is supposed
to be empty, and to pose little threat. We shall show, however, that
the reality is different; that an unrecognized hazard is out there; and
that at a stroke, civilization could be plunged into a new Dark Age.
The future shocks described herein are the logical consequence of
new discoveries which have been emerging over the past few years.
Some preliminary findings were described in an earlier book, The
Cosmic Serpent, but the analysis has since been greatly extended,
and we did not there deal with the implications for the future. That
omission is here rectified. As we anticipated, some ‘authorities’
reacted to the book with outrage, and indeed the reader should be
warned: much of what he may have regarded as established truth will
in these pages also turn a somersault.
In June 793, ‘fierce foreboding omens came over the land and
wretchedly terrified the people’, signs that are said to have been
followed by great famine. On 25 June 1178, the Moon, more or less in
line with the Earth, was apparently struck by a missile whose energy
was ten times that of the combined nuclear arsenals of the world. On
30 June 1908, an object from space exploded above a remote area of
Siberia with the energy of a large hydrogen bomb. More recently,
during five days in late June 1975, an unexpected swarm of boulders
the size of motor cars struck the Moon at a speed of 67,000 miles an
hour. And then again, on 30 June 1994, there came an unheralded
explosion with the strength of a 20-megaton bomb ...
Why late June? What is the nature of these events? And what is the
actual threat they pose for mankind? Such are the questions we
address in this book. For within these last few years, it has been
found that there is a great swarm of cosmic debris circulating in a
potentially dangerous orbit, exactly intersecting the Earth’s orbit in
June (and November) every few thousand years. More surprisingly,
perhaps, it has been found that the evidence for these facts was in the
past deliberately concealed. When the orbits exactly intersect
however, there is a greatly increased chance of penetrating the core
of the swarm, a correspondingly enhanced flow of fireballs reaching
the Earth, and a greatly raised perception that the end of the world is
nigh. This perception is liable to arise at other times as well,
whenever fresh debris is formed, but deep penetrations occurred
during the fourth millennium BC, again during the first millennium
to come.
Christian religion began appropriately enough therefore, with an
apocalyptic vision of the past, but in the aftermath of the last deep
penetrations, once the apparent danger had passed, truth was
converted to mythology in the hands of a revisionist church and such
prior knowledge of the swarm as existed, which now comes to us
through the works of Plato and others, was later systematically
suppressed. Subsequently the Christian vision of a permanent peace
on Earth was by no means universally accepted, and it was to
undergo several stages of ‘enlightenment’ before it culminated with
our present secular version of history, to which science itself
subscribes, perceiving little or no danger from the sky. The lack of
danger is an illusion however, and the long arm of an early Christian
delusion still has its effect. The Cosmic Winter, then, is a
kaleidoscope of history and science, reviving the basis of an old and
largely misunderstood pagan view of the world.
The idea of a terrible sanction hanging over mankind is not, of
course, new. Armageddon has been widely feared in the past and it
was a common belief that it would arrive with the present
millennium. During the last thousand years, moreover, it has usually
been the reforming church that revived the fear. But such ideas,
whenever they have arisen, have always met with fierce opposition.
Sometimes the proponents of such ideas escape to new found lands
where in due course they meet opposition of a homegrown kind. In
the United States for example, despite freedom of speech, old
traditions of cosmic catastrophe have recurred from time to time,
even in the present century, only to be confronted by pavlovian
outrage from authorities. That being the case, it is perhaps ironic
that elections in the United States are generally held in November
following the tradition of an ancient convocation of tribes at that
time of the year, which probably had its roots in a real fear of worldend as the Earth coincided with the swarm.
In Europe the millennium was finally dispensed with when an
official ‘providential’ view of the world was developed as a counter to
ideas sustained during the Reformation. Indeed to hold anything like
a contrary view at this time became something of a heresy and those
who were given to rabble-rousing for fear of the millennium were
roundly condemned. To the extent that a cosmic winter and
Armageddon gave aspects in common, therefore, authoritarian
outrage is nothing new.
More to the point perhaps, the way in which the British parliament
handles its affairs seems to have its roots in the condemnation of the
heresy. Thus the mother of parliaments, once its present charge was
assumed, began by turning against the founding sect known as
Ranters. Ranters rose to prominence in the period immediately
following the execution of the English king and the foundation of the
Protectorate. But they are heard of very little these days and it is not
commonly known that Ranters took their lead in 1649 from one
Gerrard Winstanley who was moved by ‘super-natural illuminations’,
along with many others, to anticipate the millennium.
In the event, the ‘destroying angel’ failed to materialize, the ranting
parliamentarians came to look foolish and it was only a matter of
time before the reins of power passed to others of a more
sophisticated persuasion whose vision of the world embodied the
kind of ‘enlightenment’ that has sustained western civilization ever
since. Enlightenment, of course, builds on the providential view and
treats the cosmos as a harmless backdrop to human affairs, a view of
the world which Academe now often regards as its business to
uphold and to which the counter-reformed Church and State are only
too glad to subscribe. Indeed it appears that repeated cosmic
stress — supernatural illuminations — have been deliberately
programmed out of Christian theology and modern science, arguably
the most influential contributions of western civilization to the
control and well-being of humanity.
As a result, we have now come to think of global catastrophe,
whether through nuclear war, ozone holes, the greenhouse effect or
whatever, as a prospect originating purely with ourselves; and
because of this, because we are faced with ‘authorities’ who never
look higher than the rooftops, the likely impact of the cosmos figures
hardly at all in national plans. Indeed, even those who do look higher
are mostly content simply to weave plausible hypotheses from the
harmony they observe in the visible spheres, and eschew any
reference to cosmic hazards in the process.
And if the overall climate of our globe should once again improve, as
it is doing during this century, and has done every few centuries
since the end of the last ice age, there may be unaware that the
cosmos is simply delaying the next input of dusty debris, alarm,
destruction and death. A great illusion of cosmic security thus
envelopes mankind, one that the ‘establishment’ of Church, State and
Academe do nothing to disturb. Persistence in such an illusion will
do nothing to alleviate the next Dark Age when it arrives. But it is
shattered; one simply has to look at the sky.
The outrage, then, springs from a singularly myopic stance which
may now place the human species a little higher than the ostrich,
awaiting the fate of the dinosaur.
I — THE LABYRINTH OF
HISTORY
Plate I. Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah (from The
Signs of Heaven by M. Hischoff).
1 — Cataracts of Fire
Pallas rushed from the peaks of Heaven like the bright star sent
by the son of crafty-counselled Chronos (as a sign either to
sailors or the broad array of nations) from which many sparks
proceed.
Homer, The Iliad 3
Scarce had the old man ceased from praying when a peal of
thunder was heard on the left and a star gliding from the
heavens amid the darkness, rushed through space followed by a
train of light; we saw the star suspended for a moment above the
roof, brighten our home with its fires, then tracing out a brilliant
course, disappear in the forests of Ida; then a long trail of flame
illuminated us, and the place around reeked with the smell of
sulphur. Overcome by these startling portents, my father arose,
invoked the gods and worshipped the holy star.
Virgil, The Aeneid 4
If the earth and sky had no starting point in time, why have no poets
sung of feats before the Theban war and the tragedy of Troy? Why
have so many heroic deeds recurrently dropped out of mind and
found no shrine in lasting monuments of fame? The answer, I
believe, is that this world is newly made: its origin is a recent event,
not one of remote antiquity. That why even now some arts are still
being perfected: the process of development is still going on ...
Alternatively you may believe that all these things existed before, but
that the human race was wiped out by a burst of fiery heat or its
cities were laid low by some great upheaval of the world ... All the
more reason, then, to concede my point and admit that an end is
coming to earth and sky. If the world was indeed shaken by such
plagues and perils, then it needs only more violent shock to make it
collapse in universal ruin ... There is no lack of external bodies to
rally out of infin ite space and blast (the world) with a turbulent
tornado or inflict some other mortal disaster ... It follows, then, that
the doorway of death is not barred to the sky ... Legend tells of one
occasion when fire got the upper hand ... The victory of fire, when
earth felt its withering blast, occurred when the galloping steeds that
draw the chariot of the Sun swept Phaethon from the true course,
right out of the zone of ether and far over all the lands. Then the
Father Almighty, in a fierce gust of anger, struck down the aspiring
Phaethon with a sudden stroke of his thunderbolt, down out of the
chariot to the earth. But the Sun intercepted the everlasting torch of
the firmament in its fall, brought the trembling steeds back to the
yoke from their stampede and, guiding them along their proper
course, restored the universe to order: Such is the story as recited by
the ancient bards of Greece, a story utterly rejected by true doctrine.
What may really lead to the triumph of fire is an increase in the
accumulation of its particles out of infinite space. Then comes the
crisis: either its forces for some reason or other suffer a setback, or
the world shrivels in its parching blasts and comes to an end.
Lucretius, De Rerum Natura 5
God, whose dwelling is in the sky, shall roll up the heavens as a book
is rolled, and the whole firmament in its varied forms shall fall on the
divine earth and on the sea; and then shall flow a ceaseless cataract
of raging fire and shall burn land and sea, and the firmament of
heaven and the stars and creation itself it shall cast in one molten
mass and clean dissolve. Then no more shall there be luminaries,
twinkling orbs, no night, no dawn. ... no spring, no summer, no
winter, no autumn.
Sybilline Oracles 6
In the west a star shall shine, which they call a comet, a messenger to
men of the sword, famine and death.
Sybilline Oracles 6
Our eyesight is not able to pass through the middle of a celestial body
to see through it to the things on the other side. But through a comet
the things beyond are seen ... Accordingly it is obvious that a comet is
not a celestial body ... Zeno judges that stars come together ... and
from this union of light there comes into existence the image of a
rather long star. Therefore some suppose that comets do not exist
but that only the appearance of comets is rendered through ... the
conjunction of stars clinging together ... Some say that comets have
their own orbits and after fixed periods of time they come into
men’s view. Others say that do not last long and are dissipated in a
brief period of time ... We see various kinds of fire conceived on high,
sometimes the heavens blazing, sometimes Tong trails of flame
glowing white behind’, sometimes great fiery bodies hurtling by ... All
men are amazed at those phenomena which carry sudden fire down
from on high, whether something flashes and disappears or the
atmosphere is compressed and forced into glowing, and it is taken as
a miracle ... Sometimes (the stars) do not wait for night but burst out
and shine well within daytime ... Why do they appear at a time not
their own? It is generally agreed that stars exist even when hidden.
Seneca, Naturales Quaestiones 7
Dynasty Han, Reign Yuan-yan, Year 1, Month 4, Day Ding-you. At
the hour of rifu, the sky was cloudless. There was a rumbling like
thunder. A meteor with a head as big as a fou, and a length of some
ten-odd zhang, colour bright red and white, went south-eastward
from below the Sun. in all directions meteors, some as large as
basins, others as large as hens’eggs, brilliantly rained down. This
only ceased at evening twilight.
Ancient Chinese Observations of Meteor Showers 8
Fierce, foreboding omens came over the land of Northumbria and
wretchedly terrified the people. There were excessive whirlwinds,
lightning storms and fiery dragons were seen flying in the sky. These
signs were followed by great famine. . .
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, June 793 9
The middle of the fourteenth century was a period of extraordinary
terror and disaster to Europe. Numerous portents, which sadly
frightened the people, were followed by a pestilence which
threatened to turn the continent into an unpeopled wilderness. For
year after year there were signs in the sky, on the earth, in the air, all
indicative, as men thought, of some terrible coming event. In 1337 a
great comet appeared in the heavens, its far-extending tail sowing
deep dread in the minds of the ignorant masses. During the three
succeeding years the land was visited by enormous flying armies of
locusts, which descended in myriads upon the fields, and left the
shadow of famine in their track ... What with famine, flood, fog,
locust swarms, earthquakes, and the like, it is not surprising that
many men deemed the cup of the world’s sins to be full, and the end
of the kingdom of man to be at hand ... An event followed that
seemed to confirm this belief. A pestilence broke out of such frightful
virulence that it appeared indeed as if man was to be swept from the
earth. Men died in hundreds, in thousands, in myriads, until in
places there were scarcely enough living to bury the dead, and these
so maddened with fright that dwellings, villages, towns, were
deserted by all who were able to flee, the dying and dead being left
their sole inhabitants. It was the pestilence called the ‘Black Death’,
the most terrible visitation that Europe has ever known ... London
lost one hundred thousand of its population; in all England a
number estimated at from one third to one half of the entire
population (then probably numbering from three to five millions)
were swept into the grave. If we take Europe as a whole it is believed
that fully a fourth of its inhabitants were carried away by this terrible
scourge. For two years, the pestilence raged, 1348 and 1349. It broke
out again in 1361-62, and once more in 1369. The mortality caused
by the plague was only one of its disturbing consequences. The bonds
of society were loosened; natural affection seemed to vanish; friend
deserted friend, mothers even fled from their children ... [others]
seeing no hope of relief from human action, turned to God as their
only refuge, and deemed it necessary to propitiate the Deity by
extraordinary sacrifices and self-tortures. The flame of fanaticism,
once started, spread rapidly and widely. Hundreds of men, and even
boys, marched in companies through the roads and streets, carrying
heavy torches, scourging their naked shoulders with knotted whips,
which were often loaded with lead or iron, singing penitential hymns,
parading in bands which bore banners and were distinguished by
white hats with red crosses. Women as well as men took part in these
fanatical exercises, marching about half-naked, whipping each other
frightfully, flinging themselves on the earth in the public places of
the towns ...
The Romance of Reality 10
Of course, the fashions and prejudices of the day will always color
our perception of the past. And from our supposedly enlightened
perspective or the twentieth century, it may seem perfectly natural to
regard Armageddon by divine dispensation as so much moonshine.
We can hardly escape the fact, however, whatever its basis, that the
dreaded expectation of fire from heaven is a pregnant component of
our intellectual heritage (Plates 1, 2).
Indeed, the fear is apparently as ancient as civilization itself. A
modern historian 11 for example, writing of the period five thousand
years ago when man’s great intellectual adventure seems to have
begun, comments that Mesopotamian civilization grew up in an
environment which was signally different from our own. As in Egypt,
there were the same great cosmic rhythms, the change of seasons,
the unwavering sweep of the Sun, Moon and stars. But also ‘an
unusual element in the sky of force and violence’. As if to imply that
this element may not also have been present in Egypt — which is, as
we shall see, questionable this historian went on to construct a
somewhat contrived antithesis between the erratic behavior of the
Tigris and the Euphrates, on the one hand, and the supposedly more
predictable behavior of the Nile on the other. But he also noted the
scorching winds smother men in dust, and threaten to suffocate him;
in addition, the torrential rains which turn firm ground into a sea of
mud and rob man of his freedom of movement. The abiding
impression, the historian seeks to assure us, is of man standing
amidst these great powers, sensing his weakness and realizing with
dread that he is caught in the interplay of giant forces in Nature.
His mood is therefore tense, and his lack of strength creates for him
an awareness of tragic potentialities.
To explain, for instance, that certain atmospheric changes broke a
drought and brought rain, we are informed that the Sumerians and
Babylonians observed much the same facts as us but experienced
them in terms of interventions by the gigantic bird Imdugud which
came to their rescue:
‘It covered the sky with the black storm clouds of its wings and
devoured the Bull of Heaven, whose hot breath had scorched the
crops’. In telling such a myth, the ancients did not intend to
provide entertainment. Neither did they seek, in a detached way
and without ulterior motives, for intelligible explanations of the
natural phenomena. They were recounting events in which they
were involved to the extent of their very existence. They
experienced, directly, a conflict of powers, one hostile to the
harvest upon which they depended, the other frightening but
beneficial: the thunderstorm reprieved them in the nick of time
by defeating and utterly destroying the drought. 12
Only by supposing the ancients dramatized the mundane, then, can
the historian apparently come to terms with the intensity of the
experiences of Nature which gave rise to the ancient Mesopotamian
mood and thus account for their disturbing notion of the cosmos: a
cosmos of predictable order rather than anarchy, it seems, but one,
nonetheless, that was far from safe or reassuring. What emerges,
then, from detailed studies of the written records and inscriptions
left by Sumerians and Babylonians is an attitude to nature which
obliged them to contemplate the universe with a sense of foreboding
hardly short of paralysis. It is this apparently strange attitude,
sustained for millennia, that seems to have led to the full
complement of diviners, soothsayers, exorcists and astrologers which
was in due course to be found in the great temples of Babylonia.
Figure 1. Beginnings of civilization. Map including the major
areas, apart from the Chinese plains, in which we have evidence
of the origin of agriculture and the building of cities in remote
antiquity (adapted from at original illustration due to J. D.
Bernal: Science in History).
We know from early Babylonian references that their most ancient
manual of astrology, an encyclopedia of omen text entitled ‘Enuma
Anu Enlil’ (‘Concerning the beginning of Anu and Enlil’), covers a
period that stretched back well into the third millennium BC. The
omen texts were essentially lists of correlated phenomena, dire
terrestrial consequences of repeated astronomical events attributable
to gods. Thus, in late Sumerian as in Old Babylonian writings, flood
and deluge were sent by the gods, along with equally catastrophic
visitations of plague, drought and famine, and there can be little
doubt that the omens were used for the puiposes of understanding
natural phenomena and predicting the likely future course of events.
To the extent, moreover, that there was a clear astronomical
association with such phenomena as the Flood, there are hints that
the astronomical visitations may have been regular as well as
harmful for in the Sumerian version of the Flood, Ziusudra,
counterpart of the Old Babylonia Ut-Napishtim and the Biblical
Noah, is represented as having an ability to forewarn! and of
resorting to divinatory practices; while Emmeduranki of Sippur, one
of the kings of this age, anticipating events, is alleged to have
obtained from the gods the skills and insignia of divination. We can
be fairly sure, in fact, that the earliest form of astronomy to be
practiced was based on an interpretation of omens associated with
regular, repeatable phenomena; and there is no question that these
omens were derived from strange celestial portents, unusual
atmospheric conditions or violent storms, each manifesting either
the good will or malevolence of the gods concerning some known or
unknown event in the future. It is possible of course, and even likely,
that ordinary agricultural, calendrical and navigational requirements
of astronomy were recognized as well. However we are left in no
doubt at all that it was these mysterious signs from heaven and
man’s fear of their possible consequences that were largely
responsible for fostering man’s careful observation of the sky.
Five thousand years later and by an extremely tortuous path, this
practice of sky watching has gradually evolved and as a result, man
has now been led to his current ‘scientific’ understanding of the
universe. This being the case, however, our modern view of the
universe, indeed science generally, appears to be grounded in
activities that seem to owe more to desperation than contemplation,
more to fear than reason; a state of affairs with which scholars are
not very comfortable. After all, if men of culture and privilege in
another generation could build cosmology out of irrationality, out of
a fear apparently rooted in imagination, how far can one trust the
pronouncements of their modernday counterparts might not be
trusted — that a modern savant 13 hastens to assure us that an
archaeologist many years hence, who chances to unearth some
twentieth-century newspaper, would naturally be led to conclude
that we too regulated our lives in accordance with the predictions of
astrologers. He is arguing, obviously, that cultured sections of the
population among early civilizations would not have been affected by
astrology and that astrological fatalism was always the device of
charlatans, not proper astronomers, for the edification of morons
who could afford to pay liberally for indulging such a cult. It is an
attractive idea: it gets science off the hook, and it leaves the ancient
astrologer to his strange devices! The idea, however, is without
foundation: indeed it is wholly wrong. The fact is that rulers and
ruled alike in ancient Mesopotamia had absolute faith in astrologers
and that it was the advice of astrologers above all which was sought
when it came to affairs of state.
On a straightforward interpretation then, putting aside our
twentiethcentury fashions and prejudices, it would seem that the sky
as understood by the Babylonians harboured dangers which
determined the destiny of nations. Indeed the level of conditioning to
this idea was so complete that the assumption itself would never
have been questioned. This is of course a striking fact; and why
intelligent men, let alone the remainder of the population, should in
the past have formulated a view of the universe so threatening and so
unlike that which presents itself to the casual observer today has
never been satisfactorily resolved in modern times — unless, of
course, we are happy with the assumption that common sense and
human courage are recent acquisitions.
There are two possible ways of explaining this hiatus in
understanding. Either the ancient sky behaved in some manner
which was truly different from the present day, or modern man is
indeed significantly more matter-of-fact and enlightened than his
ancient counterpart. The second alternative happens to be the one
that is chosen! Our modern savant, for example, goes on to say of the
historical development of his subject that it’ shows how the
conception of a continuous interference and control of the universe
by some external power gave way to a nobler and higher conception
of an inherent natural order. A mechanical view of the universe
replaced the older and cruder view, which was quite consistent with
arbitrary and vindictive acts on the part of a pretty-minded ruler.
The modern astronomer pursues his research in the assumption that
such acts do not occur and without this assumption, he could not
with any degree of confidence continue his investigations.’
To its credit, the statement is as clear an expression of fundamental
principle as one could hope to find and it certainly describes
accurately enough the lofty turn of mind that is so often cultivated
amongst the learned today. But how can we be sure that it is not
based on an insecure modern preconception? How can we be sure, in
other words, that the sky never changes, that it never produces a
cataract of raging fire?
At first sight this question still seems bizarre. After all, there were
professional sky-watchers in the past and they have left us their
records. Surely it is inconceivable that the disinterested scholars who
analyze these records could have missed anything so dramatic as a
cataract of raging fire? Indeed it could be argued that the very fact
that we are conditioned to believe the sky was not dangerous is
evidence enough that it was not: after all, the experts who have
examined the evidence thoroughly must have arrived at this
conclusion in a balanced way. On the face of it, therefore, this is not
an issue that can suddenly become a topic for renewed speculation:
one is surely dealing with reasonably established historical facts.
But of course, history is not all a collection of hard facts. 14 Like
science, history is a matter of inference; and records may in principle
mislead unless an accurate picture of what they describe is also at
hand. The question that is posed therefore is whether the records left
by the ancient sky-watchers are so transparent as to their meaning
that no misunderstanding can possibly exist. Is it absolutely certain,
then, what the Babylonian astrologers had in mind?
Until fairly recently, this has not seemed a particularly interesting
question to ask. It has generally been assumed that the first thoughts
of any real value about the universe are those handed down to us by
the Greeks. However this assumption has been seriously questioned
by Otto Neugebauer, 15 the distinguished historian of mathematics
and astronomy, and it is his conclusion that Babylonian skywatching should not be regarded as irrational, even though its nature
and purpose did eventually undergo a profound change. This finding
has not as yet very much influence on the generality of scientific
historical studies. Nevertheless, it is Neugebauer’s thesis that a quite
significant scientific revolution was engineered by the Greeks around
the fourth century BC and that little progress can be made in
understanding ancient science and history until the precise nature of
this intellectual upheaval has been fully explored. On the face of it, a
scientific methodology developed and perfected over a thousand
years earlier in Hammurab’s Babylon was put aside by astronomers
of this later period in favour of new analytical techniques along with
new understandings of nature. In essence, the practice and theory of
‘omen astrology’, or judicial astrology as it is sometimes called, gave
way at the very foundation of western civilization to the new-found
theory and practice of ‘horoscopic astrology’.
We shall be examining various aspects of this development at greater
length in a later chapter but for the moment we note two points. On
the one hand, the Greeks are now clearly seen as having taken over
certain recent advances in the mathematical methods of the
Babylonians and fashioning them in new and unexpected directions.
On the other hand, arising from this step, the Greeks can now be
seen also as having abandoned at this time the prevailing view of the
cosmos and cultivating an entirely new understanding of how it
works.
On the mathematical side, it was the Babylonians, as we now know,
who developed the precise algebraic techniques that enabled the
combined effects of various superposed periodicities in the motion of
heavenly bodies to be calculated. These techniques were essential in
determining the apparent position of the Moon and in setting up an
accurate calendar based on its motion. 16 However, it is perfectly
clear that the Babylonians also knew, as we do now, that such
calculations could be done without reference to any physical model
of the Moon’s behavior. They understood that they were merely
projecting into the future, with greater precision than would have
been possible without mathematics, such Pends and correlations as
had been detected amongst past measurements. But it was the
Greeks who took over the principles of this algebra and applied them
to geometrical models: they suggested that the positions of the
planets in the sky could be explained as the combined effects of
various superposed circular motions, and by these means they came
to invent the theory of epicycles.
No harm would have come of this otherwise laudable computing
Device had it not then happened that Greek philosophers took to
thinking the epicycles were physically real. There emerged the idea
that planets, with the Sun and the Moon, were somehow attached to
invisible crystalline spheres interlocked by a complicated and equally
invisible system of revolving gears. Soon, by the force of their own
logic, the Greeks were convincing themselves that nothing out of the
sky would penetrate these crystalline spheres to harm the Earth
below. 17
.
Astronomers and scientists generally have, of course, long realized
that the epicyclic system was an illusion but in directing these
particular Greek thought to the intellectual dustbin, it has been all
too easy to hang them on the Babylonia forebears of the Greeks as
well. In fact, there is no good reason for supposing the Babylonians
were similarly captivated or that it affected their view of the cosmos.
Indeed, as Neugebauer explains, all the evidence indicates that the
Babylonians, unlike the Greeks, were quite straightforward in their
dealings with astronomy the universe may have been frightening but
they sought to describe it much as they saw it, in simple
commonsense terms. To them, there would have been nothing odd
about things out of the sky harming the Earth. If, then, the
Babylonians appear to confront real things in the sky, as the
historians would have us believe, and if, also, we have good reason to
believe that the astrologers were straightforward and scientific, why
can we not settle the issue by examining the astrologer’s actual
records and discovering the precise nature of the sky they described?
The ancient city of Babylon first came to prominence early in the
second millennium BC, as Semitic immigrants gradually merged
with and supplanted the indigenous Sumerian
population. 18 Sumerian culture was not lost however and it was the
founding of new schools of language and theology which apparently
created the atmosphere of general learning that emerged in Babylon
and which then provided the milieu in which the discipline of
mathematics was able to originate. There also emerged a powerful
new ecclesiastical school beholden to the god Marduk. This deity,
whilst not altogether displacing Anu, the highest of the ancient
Sumerian gods, now achieved great power and completely replaced
earlier animal divinities such as Enlil (probably a bull) and Ea
(probably a ram) who were also of high rank in the Sumerian
pantheon. Apart from their ecclesiastical deities however, the priests
of Marduk were also astronomers and it is they who seem to have
initiated the practice and theory of omen astrology. Under their
guidance, celestial phenomena came to be used for predicting the
imminent future of the country and its government, particularly the
king. From the appearance or non-appearance of ‘planetary bodies’,
conclusions were drawn concerning the invasion of enemies from the
east or the west, and in addition the arrival of floods and storms, but
nothing like a horoscope based on a constellation at the moment of
birth has ever been found. In other words, Babylonian astrology right
from the start is seen as being much better compared with weather
prediction from phenomena observed in the skies than it is with the
casting of horoscopes. Indeed it is now hardly to be doubted that this
omen astrology was soundly based on the concept of observed
irregularities in nature which were indicative of other disturbances
to come, and in this respect it differs not at all from the practice of
modern science.
But whilst the principles underlying the methodology seem
reasonable, the same is not generally said of the actual observations.
Thus the specific and fundamental irregularities that the astronomer
priests of Marduc were in the habit of recording were the emergence
of new-born lambs and the appearance of the liver or other internal
parts of lifeless sheep! Thousands upon thousands of clay tablets
have been unearthed on which were kept the updated accounts
relating to the delivery of these animals or their fleeces. Such
observations immediately conjure up a rather mundane or
distasteful image: the astrologers seem to be more at home in the
market place, or to indulge in strange sacrificial practices that have
little to do with the honest pursuit of knowledge. However, we
should not forget that astronomerspriests were also the spokesmen
on earth for generations of leaders who clamed their divine right to
rule from sky gods who, as shepherd-kings, were said to have
descended with their flocks from Heaven at the time of the Flood. It
may not be coincidental therefore that the recurrence of a
catastrophic event like the Flood should have been anticipated on the
basis of deviant behavior by sheep, something which must
presumably have preceded the Flood itself. For if each sheep was in
fact some kind of celestial object which was in the habit of going into
predictable decline before fragmenting into a number of bright
offspring under circumstances that were not without danger to our
planet, the astronomer-priests’ custom of recording the arrival of
sheep and of examining the state of their various internal parts might
not seem so strange. Once again, of course, the reader will expect
that this possibility has been carefully examined and found wanting,
so it will be something of a surprise to learn that the actual
Babylonian character for the wandering star, lubai, literally means
stray sheep! In addition, the observation often relate to a particular
ring in the sky (the zodiac) whose literal meaning is that of a fence or
stream enclosing a sheep meadow. The records we interpret, in other
words, do not distinguish between sheep and stars! The actual
imagery indeed is of sheep that are scuttling around a pen in the sky,
developing ailments that have some adverse consequences so far as
our livelihood down here is concerned. Why then are the cuneiform
scholars so perverse as not to take this imagery at face value? Why do
they insist on understandings of the data which are either
sacrilegious or mundane? Presumably, it is because they have been
unable to relate any known astronomical phenomenon to any image
of sheep scuttling around the sky that is also threatening.
Fortunately, it is possible to resolve the question of what the
astronomer-priests were doing by examining the way in which omen
astrology developed. Thus, although the political power of Babylon
was in due course eclipsed, the city maintained a thousand-year-old
uninterrupted tradition of culture and learning which eventually, in
the first millennium BC, attracted the admiration of much younger
states. Indeed from the seventh century onwards, we find Persians,
Jews and Greeks alike, all apparently drawn to Babylon by the
magnet of ‘Chaldean’ science, sparking off something akin to a
renaissance in the cosmopolitan atmosphere of easy communication
and competition that then seemed to emerge. However it should be
kept in mind that a revival of interest in the sky can also be sparked
off by events in the sky itself. Whatever the setting, Babylonian
mathematics and astrology experienced a great revival which
continued into the so-called Seleucid period, and it is perhaps no
surprise to find visitors such as Zarathustra and Pythagoras, like
Abraham much earlier, being proclaimed in their own lands as the
inventors of all science and the creators of astrology and numberwisdom, each then asserting himself as the oldest and hence the
teacher of mankind. 19
Plate 2. Final Judgement. Based on a sixteenth-centary fresco at
the Dionysian Monastery Mount Athos in Northern Greece
(Roger Bargue). Note the highly realistic portrait of a meteor
shower associated with seismic disturbance and divine control.
In later chapters, we shall be tracing the thread of science along its
labyrinthine path through ancient Greece and the empires of
Macedon and Rome to the present day. Pliny, for example, will
inform us that ‘fleece’ was still a commonplace term for comets at the
beginning of this era (chapter 6). But more to the point, paths cast
also carried the theory and practice of Babylonian astrology through
Persia and India to China where it experienced yet another
renaissance towards the end of the first millennium AD. 20 And here,
at last, there can be little doubt about what the astrologers were
doing. 21 Their preoccupation was first and foremost with the
detection of ‘guest stars’ and with the enumeration of fireballs, the
former now know to be largely comets and the latter, those extrabright meteors, now known to be largely their offspring. But, as
Schafer has recently remarked in relation to the acknowledged status
of these practices, ‘where the historian of Chinese science [now]
tends to be concerned with the accuracy of such ratios and
measurements as the obliquity of the ecliptic and the length of the
year, the astrologers of the T’ang [were] more concerned with the
benign or alarming visions that signaled to them from the black
vault’.
Even today there are sky-watchers around the world who continue in
the Babylonian tradition of Chinese astrologers and occasionally
observe the diminishing tail of a fading comet, or record the arrival
of shooting stars. But one thing is certain: they do not commonly
reflect on what the ancients may have been doing when they
examined the dwindling entrails or registered a count in the presence
of incident sheep. The thought that a dead comet might
metamorphose into a dangerous swarm of ‘hidden stars’ is one that
the fashions and prejudices of the present day do not allow. Logic
requires us to keep our shepherd-kings in the ancient sky and regard
them as a myth!
The problem then is one of interpretation. The Babylonian astrologer
did indeed describe the danger in the sky. Furthermore, throughout
history, observers have made the link between catastrophe down
here and danger up there. Cuneiform scholars are not of course
unaware of the ambiguities that arise out of the fact that the earliest
sky-watchers were shepherds. There must therefore be a deeper
conviction to which they subscribe, namely that the sky does not,
after all, harbor any danger. In the chapters that follow, we shall
attempt to trace how this conviction came about and consider
whether it has any basis in fact.
2 — Forces of Evil
It is in the nature of things that bodies of knowledge tend to be
slotted into models, or theoretical pictures of reality. It often
happens that new facts come along which do not fit perfectly into old
ideas, but in practice small modifications to the overall structure
usually ensure that it remains intact. It occasionally happens,
however, that inconsistent facts so accumulate that they cannot be
accommodated within an existing framework; things then break
down, and sometimes it is necessary to have a full-scale revolution in
thinking. In this situation old facts remain valid but they are
understood in a quite different way, with new patterns of thought. To
the participants, truth itself often seems to do a somersault although,
of course, it does not: it is simply the perception of the truth that is
being discarded. 22
It is, however, difficult to judge when an accumulation of cracks in a
structure can be repaired, and when they are signaling that collapse
is imminent. Indeed, scientific reputations are made and lost on such
judgments. It is easy in retrospect to marvel at establishment
obtuseness, but a given situation is rarely clear-cut at the time, and
for every successful scientific revolution there are many more which
fail or never get off the ground. But if truth often advances in this
fitful way, it must follow that erroneous models of reality are held for
periods of time which may be quite long, before the weight of
evidence destroys them.
It also follows that there may well be ideas which are widely or
universally held to be true today, which are in fact false. There are
many historical precedents — geocentrism and Biblical creationism
are two familiar examples — which show that humanity is perfectly
capable of holding on to the wrong preconceived model for
thousands of years: human reasoning on its own is very fallible and
experience shows that it is liable to go more and more astray unless it
is continually checked against new observations or experiments. It is,
then, usually new evidence which eventually destroys erroneous
preconceptions; but when this happens, the old evidence too has to
be re-thought.
A revolution is under way in the Earth sciences. Terrestrial
catastrophism, the idea that the evolution of life and even
fundamental geological processes are controlled by sudden inputs of
material from space, has become an important if controversial
concept in these fields within the last few years (see chapters 14 and
15). The evidence is partly in the rocks, but it also derives in large
part from new astronomical observations. The standard view
advocated for a century or more by experts in geology and biology,
that the Earth evolves in splendid isolation from its surroundings, is
proving to be wrong. What we are doing in this book is taking the
same astronomical discoveries and applying them to timescales of
historical rather than geological interest. That is, we show how the
same astronomical evidence which is now leading to new insights in
the earth sciences also tells us that cataracts of fire must have taken
place within the last few thousand years. We consider how historical
evidence is better fitted to this new catastrophist framework.
The reader must not be deceived, however. We also deal in this book
with matters at the boundary of human knowledge and which, for
one reason or another, are accepted as understood within a quite
different framework. Cataracts of fire, if contemplated at all by the
expert, are considered to be absurd. The question we are inviting the
reader to consider therefore is whether the facts are already beyond
the level where the standard point of view can still absorb them. The
Babylonians, for example, have told us quite plainly that they were
afraid of things in the sky and, as we have seen, they described what
they observed in terms that leave little doubt as to the appearance of
the danger they perceived. And yet, the modern interpreter elects to
discount this knowledge, believing that what was observed must have
been imagined. We shall argue indeed that this is not the only
instance and that large bodies of written evidence are now ignored or
cursorily dismissed because they do not fit into a preconceived
twentieth-century framework, which was, after all, constructed
before the new discoveries in Earth science and the new
astronomical evidence came along. Indeed, given our opening story,
there is another dimension to the discussion: can the all-toocommon scholarly approach, of holding on to cherished views by the
fingernails until forced off by the sheer weight of evidence, be
morally justified? What justification can there be for sustaining an
unshakeable conviction that may put civilization at risk?
Between seven and five thousand years ago, our planet was
experiencing a relatively benign climate. The condition seem to have
played some part in causing communities in several different areas of
Asia and North Africa to evolve the first urban economies (figure 1).
Thus by 3000 BC, rather similar great civilizations outside China had
emerged on the alluvial soils of three major river systems: the TigrisEuphrates in Mesopotamia, the Nile in Egypt and along the Indus
Valley in an area that corresponds to much of modern Pakistan. The
advance of these civilizations evidently depended in part on the
production of sufficient food to support not only the section of the
population involved in such work but also the specialist classes
engaged in craft industries and administration. The necessary
surplus was apparently achieved through the transfer of farming
practice in the highland zones to the alluvial plains of these
particularly extensive river valleys which could be exploited, through
irrigation, to produce high crop yields.
Around 3000 BC however, and lasting for about two centuries, the
terrestrial climate deteriorated quite markedly on a global
scale. 23 Rainfall increased and the average temperature declined.
The northernmost tree-line in Canada and Northern Europe for
example fell back several hundred miles (figure 2); and this in spite
of the proliferation of forests elsewhere. Mountain glaciers increased
their range. During this period, too, major flooding occurred in
Mesopotamia and Egypt; the former evident in the silt excavated
beneath ancient citadels and the latter revealed by the location of
temples relative to the fluctuating Nile. Elsewhere large-scale
changes in vegetation and ground cover were taking place, including
those brought on by extensive forest fires supposedly due to
clearances undertaken in a period of presumed agricultural
prosperity. 24 It is a paradox of any global climatic recession that
whilst some areas experience a worsening of general conditions,
others may enjoy an amelioration of the environment. 25 In general
though, we can be sure there was change: for some a turn for the
better, for others, a period of prolonged strife.
Figure 2. Mean summer temperatures (global average relative to
its present day value) based on the movements of the Arctic
treeline during the last 7,000 years (reproduced from The Little
Ice Age by J. Grove). The sustained amelioration during the
period 6000-1500 BC corresponds to the recognized climatic
optimum of the Holocene period, whilst the broken lines
indicate possible brief ameliorations due to a reduced incidence
of atmospheric dust veils, as indicated by acidity peaks in
Greenland ice cores and frosted tree rings.
Remarkably, the same epoch brings clear evidence of a surge in
civilization; new skills, the appearance of writing and the
establishment of a professional class, all coinciding essentially with
the start of the historical era. Moreover it may be inferred from the
various new state enterprises that were undertaken after this time,
for example the construction of pyramids and the implementation of
large irrigation schemes, that the population was motivated beyond
any previous expectation. Judgements of what was required and
levels of application in human effort emerged that completely
transcended earlier practice.
The question naturally arises whether these dramatic developments
had anything to do with the change of climate. We shall ask also
whether the pace could have been set by an unexpected
overpowering force, related to the change in climate, which
simultaneously created a sense of urgency and no little
apprehension.
Neither of these lines of research seems to have been seriously
pursued by modern archaeologists and historians. Most of these
experts assume we are dealing with a coincidence and that the
physical change of climate around 3000 BC could at best have had
only a minor influence on the advance of civilization. A century ago,
in the aftermath of the industrial revolution, indeed before the
physical evidence of climate change was known, it seemed natural to
explain the parallel rise of the great ‘hydraulic empires’ in terms of
the diffusion of knowledge and lucky breaks in practical know-how.
Prehistory was therefore envisaged as a succession of more advanced
technological states stone, bronze, iron and so on — each phase
gaining more leisure wherein to plan subsequent more rapid
advances of mankind. Something of the influence of Darwin’s theory
of evolution can be seen in this way of looking at prehistory.
However the scheme of never-ending technological evolution, so
alluring to the nineteenth- and twentieth-century mind, began to
look rather vulnerable when it was realized that some Europeans
were extracting and processing copper well before the fourth
millennium BC. It was clear then to the experts that if the idea of
evolution was not to be abandoned, technology would have to
become something of an incidental theme. The notion emerged
therefore that separate communities would evolve in parallel because
of some innate natural law of human behavior. Given similar initial
conditions, it was assumed, communities would develop similar
internal ‘socio-economic pressures’ driving them to similar states of
civilization. Such pressure would cause mankind to advance from a
primitive state of savagery through nomadic pastoralism and
barbarism to settled agriculture and mature civilization. The same
pressures would gather homesteads into villages, merge villages into
city states, cause urban civilizations to grow and monolingual
empires to spread, until the species inherited the Earth. The replaced
by the sociological ones of the mid-twentieth. 26
A line of thinking has developed therefore in which it now seems
most natural to subordinate the ultimate course of history to man’s
civilizing urge. By following the technological fashions of the
nineteenth century and the sociological ones of the twentieth, in fact,
the archaeologist and the historian may have contrived to keep
environmental factors at bay. If one studies the Wessex culture of
Early Bronze Age Britain, for example, it may be to discover whether
it arose locally during trade with the continent, or whether it was
imposed by continental invaders on a subject population. The answer
provides insight perhaps into the processes by which different races
of people gain dominance over one another and advance the fate of
nations. But by attaching importance to such patterns in human
behavior as may then emerge, and regarding them as an end in
themselves, without introducing any allowance for the differing
physical circumstances and changes of environment, there is always
the risk of imposing patterns on the course of history that bear no
relation to its underlying motivation. Sociological formulae are
rather limited in their scope therefore. Indeed, if information is
limited, and this is usually the case, the issues are often intractable
and virtually impossible to resolve. Nevertheless, if it seems there is
no other course to follow, the programme of enquiry may continue to
be justified to the exclusion of others. The result is that one learns
only very slowly, if at all, whether a productive line of enquiry is
being pursued. In the present instance, therefore, it may be asked
whether archaeologists and historians have committed themselves to
a line of enquiry that is potentially interminable. With such a
restrictive programme, apparently self-imposed, it seems there may
be only a slender chance of returning to the fundamental issue at
stake: that is, whether the symptoms of civilization, man’s
technological and sociological feats, the rise and fall of nations,
reflect the incidence of some deeper historical force.
To get back to this question, however, we are bound to study what
the ancients themselves said. So far we have simply considered the
state of the Mesopotamian mind and the activities of astrologers
several millennia ago, but perhaps one of the most surprising aspects
of all that went on is the significance of the role the ancients attach to
gods. In Egypt also, at the start of the third millennium BC, people
were attributing their welfare and misfortune to divine beings of
comparatively recent provenance. It behooves us, perhaps, to see
now whether anything more can be learned about these gods. One
might imagine, for example, in view of the climatic changes at the
time, that purely symbolic ‘weather gods’ were invented as a
convenient mode of expression and that these subsequently got out
of hand! However this would certainly be to understate the
enormous scope of the gods in Egyptian eyes, even if it were tolerable
on other grounds.
Thus it was from about 3000 BC onwards that the dynastic pharaohs
took for granted their infusion of godly power derived from an
ancestral deity. 27 And with divine names like Scorpion, Catfish,
Fighter, Serpent and Killer, for example, it is hardly to be doubted
that the early kings looked upon their gods as quite a bellicose
bunch. Eventually, the feudal sparring between Egyptian chieftains
gave way to a more omnipotent pharaoh and a more regal style of
existence. Horns, a falcon-god, became the sky-god associated par
excellence with kingship: essentially a benevolent figure, he provided
security and continuity going back to the very foundation of the new
Egyptian state. It is no denial, of course, of any contribution of
climatic change to possible conditions of strife if we follow the
Egyptians themselves awhile and scrutinize carefully the role of
Horns, whom they took to be their accepted savior.
The multifarious nature of Egyptian mythology arises from the fact
that different city-states claimed the special protection of different
gods. With the amalgamation of cities, the god of one city was liable
to be identified with the god of another. It was customary however
for each god to have its own family and relations, many of them
being in animal form, while in due course, the more significant ones
tended to become humanized. Despite immediate impression,
therefore, the Egyptians have analogues of the divine shepherd with
his sheep, and the mythologies have a monotheistic flavor from a
very early stage: the single, very remote god Ptah is one such
example associated with generations of subsequent deities.
According to the earliest cosmic legends, Osiris and Seth were firstgeneration paternal gods of considerable importance. Respectively
black and red skinned, they also brought into existence ‘two lands’.
These lands, Blackland and Redland, were apparently the two main
areas of a supposedly huge flat world. The contemporary
geographical world centred on Egypt seems moreover to have been
incorporated into Blackland, the latter being bounded by a
continuous enclosure which separated it from Redland. This
enclosure, constructed by Osiris, clearly lay in the cosmic real
however since it also marked the zodiacal path of the celestial barque
in which the Sun-god and a further complement of sky gods made
their daily journey.
It was implicit therefore in this early Egyptian conception of the
world that the flat Earth was more or less continuous with a flat
cosmos. Egyptian temples were even modeled on the arrangement,
the enclosure being represented by a rectangular colonnade and wall
whose interior face was decorated with a waving stream surmounted
by a starry sky. The enclosure was in fact synonymous with a river or
stream whilst Redland beyond, literally outside, was frequently
indentified as an ocean or sea. Thus, another aspect of the imagery
connected with Blackland and Redland was their supposed
transformation from or emergence out of the primordial waters of
chaos, which were also in some sense associated with the birth of
Osiris and Seth.
Within the enclosure and at one end was the so-called Island of
Creation, the possible repository of a meteoritic stone, as at Mecca,
whilst at the other, on either side of the main entrance, were two
huge pylons, a representation of features which were apparently
thought to extend out of the cosmic enclosure into cosmic space, in
an arrangement which seems to have been sufficiently part of the
accepted scheme of things to have been later subsumed in places of
worship as pairs of towers or minarets. This is an important aspect of
cosmic structure to which we shall return at a later stage. For the
moment, we simply note that Osiris was believed to have been
murdered by Seth who then dismembered his body and distributed
its parts around the enclosure. Isis, the devoted sister and wife of
Osiris, was later responsible for putting her husband’s body together
again, and thus resurrected, posthumously conceiving a child by him.
The child, Horns, was raised to manhood by his mother and
eventually avenged his father’s death by repeatedly defeating Seth in
battle.
To the Egyptians, especially during the Middle Kingdom, this
recurring conflict epitomized past and future triumphs of the forces
of good over the forces of evil, and they clearly identified Horus as
the lord and protector of Egypt. Implicitly, there was an
understanding that the forces of evil might sometimes make
incursions into the territory belonging to the forces of good under
Homs’s protection, and there are references throughout Egyptian
history to threats from these foreign peoples of the Sea. The collapse
of the Middle Kingdom (c. 1650 BC) may indeed be directly
attributable to their influence. We read for example of ‘a blast from
God’ which left Egypt in a state of ‘dire affliction’ without a sovereign
upon the throne. ‘Rulers of foreign lands’ called the Hyksos then took
over the country, apparently without a struggle, burning the cities
and the temples of God. They were said to have Seth as their god and
they are definitely presented as barbarians and ruthless overlords,
though archaeologists and historians can find little or no material
evidence from the period of their rule to support such a claim. To
this day, there is no physical indication of invaders from any country
with which the Hyksos may be identified. It seems they may as well
have brought brief destruction from the sky! Seen in this light, Horus
and Seth and their cosmic setting do not seem unreasonable and one
can understand perhaps why they should have been of such lasting
significance for Egyptian life. We are led to conclude that the cosmic
menace in the Mesopotamian sky, whatever it was, was observed in
Egypt as well.
Indeed, wherever one looks in the contemporary ancient world, one
comes across creation myths 28 referring to celestial giants who
engaged one another in battle and who once dominated the
terrestrial scene. This battle was likewise a recurring one which
usually ended in victory by the forces of good. The victory over Seth
by Horus has its counterpart for example in the defeat of the ancient
Babylonian Tiamat by Marduk, the Greek Cyclops by Titans amongst
whom Zeus was eventually to be regarded as the most prominent, the
conquest of the Hebrew Behemoth by Leviathan, the contest with of
the Hebrew Behemoth by Leviathan, the contest with the Dragon
that ended in victory for St. George and the overcoming of Satan by
Yahweh, to name but a few (see table 1). No more than a cursory
examination of these ancient myths is necessary to show that the
forces of evil always had strong celestial overtones (see chapter 13),
so the Mesopotamian civilization was far from being alone in its
intense fear of the sky. Indeed it is difficult to escape the impression
that specific agencies were present in the ancient sky one of which
was seen as a potential threat to man whilst the other seems
eventually to have been regarded as a saviour. The question that has
to be resolved therefore is whether there is any material basis for a
dualism in the sky, one aspect plainly harmless and the other a
clearly perceived danger.
It is characteristic of the recurrent conflict that the forces of evil
eventually succumb to the forces of good, and in those cases
where no father-figure is clearly identified, it is possible that a
very ancient name has been preserved in that of the later
benevolent force.
It is interesting to note for example that Osiris is shown in ancient
illustrations wearing a long white cloak. He is said by the Egyptians
to have brought with him the inspiration for civilization and
agriculture. Eventually however, he lost his former glory and died,
though his rejuvenated spirit was said to have survived and lived in
his successor. Each pharaoh, symbolized by Horus during life, thus
became Osiris on death. The desert by Osiris into the underworld
followed by his journey to the Place of Ascension, otherwise the
Island of Creation, was symbolized by a formal procession leading to
the final resting place, a pyramid, the latter in some sense
representing a heavenly abode as real as the cosmic enclosure
separating Blackland from Redland. Obviously there is a problem in
identifying where symbolism ends and reality begins but one may
speculate whether a regularly revealed object in the sky with the
appearance of a long white cloak can break up and lose its former
glory whilst building in space a temporary island and a temporary
closed path from outside which the Earth may continue to be
menaced.
In this connection, it is clearly important to note that the traditions
relating to Typhon in Greek myth, who corresponds to Seth, the
opponent of Osiris in battle, also have rather definite cosmic
connections. Typhoon is specifically referred to as a kind of comet by
several classical authorities and in the first century after Christ,
Plutarch 29 wrote:
as for the dimmed and shattered power of Typhon, though it is
at its last gasp and in its final death-throes, the Egyptians sill
appease and soothe it with certain feasts of offerings. Yet again,
every now and then, at certain festivals they humiliate it
dreadfully and treat it most despitefully — even to rolling
redskinned men in the mud and driving an ass over a precipice
(as the Koptos folk) — because Typhon was bom with his skin
red and ass-like.
The red, ass-like skin of a dimmed and shattered god seems
distinctly obscure to the twentieth-century mind, and one might seek
to dismiss it as an incomprehensible piece of symbolism. However
we shall anticipate later discussion (chapter 12) by noting that as a
description of a once-great but near-defunct comet it is entirely
appropriate.
Naturally, if such happenings were observed in the sky, one can
appreciate why ancient myths from all over the world, especially
those with a cosmological flavor, should have acquired similar
underlying themes and many details in common. Furthermore, if the
happenings were responsible in some way for assaults on the Earth
by cataracts of fire leading to the breakdown of law and order, we can
expect some overall coherence in the pattern of world history: we can
expect the simultaneous collapse of empires, populations on the
move at much the same time, conflicts to be forced and new ideas to
emerge, dominated perhaps by a deep fear of what the sky has in
store. This, strangely, is the pattern of world history (e.g. see table 2)
and many a scholarly reputation has crumbled already in the search
for its underlying cause. One cannot, of course, immediately presume
on this basis that an interaction of the kind under discussion must
therefore have happened. What we can say, however, is that the
evidence is more consistent with the proposition than we might
otherwise have been disposed to believe. To the extent that cataracts
of fire of cometary origin may have been a general source of terror in
the past and it is natural to expect ritual responses that would then
be preserved by desperate people seeking to appease apparently
uncontrollable cosmic forces, we can also expect that the orbital
characteristics of any particular comet involved might be reflected in
very ancient social practices which have by this time lost their
meaning. Fire festivals for example, involving bonfires, processions
with blazing torches, tumbling burning wheels down hills, hurling
lighted discs into the air and many other variations on similar
themes, are in fact commonplace throughout the world and it is
significant that these tend to occur most often during early
November (Hallowe’en) and mid-June, the beginning of the former
month being also commonly regarded in the past as the start of the
calendar year. Whilst neither date has any conspicuous agricultural
significance and the former bears no obvious relationship to the
seasonal location of the Sun, there is a definite association between
these times of the year and intersections by the Earth with the orbit
of a particularly significant comet. We will return to this comet in the
pages that follow (e.g. chapter 13) but for the moment, we again note
connections which are more direct than we might otherwise have
been disposed to believe.
Table 2 (opposite): The climate of the last 10,000 years appears
to be divided by relatively sharp global recessions (sheded) into
distinct periods (sub-atlantic etc.) whose offering average
conditions correlate with the frequency of meteoric inputs (x) in
the range of sub-cometary mass. Thus it may be that the most
intense meteoric inputs correspond with little ice-ages (not all
shown), capable in some instances of generating a dark age.
Microscopic carbon particles and charred plants are detected in
basal layers of peat laid down during the most conspicuous
climatic recessions (*) and are due to extensive forest fires, often
remote from civilization, suggesting an extreme natural cause
(see text) rather then human activity (commonly assumed). The
overall pattern of civilization’s development is certainly more
complex than the table suggests but climatic recessions,
characterized by glacial advance, ocean fall, lowered tree-lines,
peat formation and floral as well as faunal change, including
human migration, appear also to be associated with higher
degress of human deprivation and conflict from which new
national groupings emerge to forge new empires: the arrows
reflect general advances through city-states, nationstates and
empire to a world civilization which is not generally achieved.
Coupled with these developments are changing cosmological
paradigms reflecting the perceived significance of meteoric (M)
and planetary (P) phenomena as well as the level of danger
induced by the astronomical environment. The simple sketch of
the evolution of British civilization in the final column relates to
the discussion in chapter 7.
Mythology and ancient ritual then, whether Egyptian, Mesopotamian
or of some other source not considered here, point rather strongly to
a persistent conflict with and within the ancient sky. Modern
interpreters, historians and archaeologists, have nearly always
chosen to give the evidence a figurative interpretation, believing the
references to deities can only be symbolic. We shall not argue the
matter any further for the moment; nations and empires have
declined in modern times for reasons which are clearly more political
than cosmic, so there is no question of a unique one-to-one
relationship. Our purpose at this stage is simply to demonstrate that
there are reasonable grounds for doubt.
But if the alternative picture is correct, the periods of stability in
history which normally capture our attention lose something of their
significance. It is the times when nations fall into chaos and ruin that
mark the real turning points in civilization. Between crises, we might
expect a semblance of order even if it takes a century or two to
achieve, whilst a threat from the sky, even over a decade and even if
it never materializes, may be sufficient to cause a delicately balanced
social equilibrium to be lost for ever. Egyptian history, for example,
is characterized by periods of warring city states and lack of central
cohesion, even amounting to chaos and dark age, out of which there
arose long periods of stability dominated by powerful, magnificent
and generally stable kingdoms. These kingdoms, closely paralleled by
periods of high civilization in Mesopotamia (table 3), appear to have
collapsed suddenly in circumstances that are indeed not properly
understood, each time initiating a new period. The approximate
dates for the start of these periods, based on conventional
chronology, are 3100, 2200, 1650 and 1250 BC. 30 The first
corresponds to the close of the prehistoric era, the second to the
close of the Old Kingdom, the third when the Middle Kingdom was
abruptly terminated by the arrival of the Hyksos invaders, and the
fourth in the interregnum years following Ramese 11 when Egypt
temporarily succumbed to attacks by the Sea-Peoples. Though
civilization then continued in reduced circumstances, the collapse in
this final instance was apparently so devastating that Egypt never
again succeeded in attaining its former glory. It was collapse that did
not go unrecognized elsewhere.
The cultural highspots in the development of Egyptian and
Mesopotamian civilization are apparently correlated, though it
also has to be kept in mind that the chronology, being largely
geared to Manetho’s Egyptian king-lists and the insecurely
calibrated Sothic calendar, is probably only approximate.
3 — The Heraclids
It was not just in the valleys and deltas of great rivers like the Tigris
and the Euphrates, or the Indus and the Nile that civilization first
took an upward turn. The great urban civilization coming at the start
of the third millennium BC may have been the most conspicuous but
further to the west, the inhabitants of the Aegean were also shaking
off their Stone Age ways. Less impressive at first perhaps but no less
accomplished, these people were also to reach a high level of artistic
and technological achievement and by the beginning of the second
millennium BC the Minoan civilization, centred on the island of
Crete, had not only developed commercial and cultural links with the
other great civilizations but had established itself as the dominant
influence in the Mediterranean basin.
Relatively little is known of the Minoan contacts in other directions
at this time, though Indo-European settlers penetrating from the
north and east were already reaching the nearby Greek mainland. It
used to be thought that these settlers spoke the same Aryan language
from which are descended the Latin, Sanskrit, Celtic and Teutonic
tongues, but the evidence indicates only that by 1600 BC, these
settlers had combined with the population already present and had
laid the foundations for a new Greek-speaking Mycenean culture on
the mainland in a state of seemingly peaceful co-existence with their
more powerful Minoan neighbours to the south across the sea.
The Greeks of classical antiquity 31 are indeed believed to have been
drawn from two sources, representing something of a balance
between an earlier indigenous population, which may have spoken a
Semitic language, and an immigrant wave of peoples, from lands to
the north and east, who spoke languages belonging to the IndoEuropean family. Legend seems to point to two ancient provinces of
Greece, Achaea and Doris, where immigrant and earlier Aegean
stocks were apparently superimposed. However the archaeological
evidence suggests the latter was a comparatively late settlement
around 1100 BC, and there is no indication that it was on any
significant scale. Indeed it is generally accepted now that the
principal Indo-European strain goes back to at least 2000 BC and
that the feeling of racial unity that developed among the loosely
organized groups, living in the narrow valleys between the mountain
ranges and long gulfs which characterize the Greek archipelago,
owed as much to the indigenous maritime people as it did to any
superior warrior-caste invaders. Of course the Indo-European
invaders could have been mainly responsible for the cohesion of the
nation by imposing their feudal, aristocratic ways upon an otherwise
subservient people; but it is also clear now that the Greek language
was of local origin that the sense of nationhood within the population
could equally well be of considerable antiquity.
Thus the version of the Minoan script known as Linear B, which was
used at the Cretan capital Knossos in the final period of its
prosperity, is known to be an early Greek dialect identical with that
current in Mycenean Greece at the time. This seems to indicate that
Greek and Linear B reflect a language that was already fairly
widespread in the Aegean by the mid-second millennium BC. The
apparent predecessor of Linear B, namely Linear A, which was used
during the period of the second Cretan palaces (1800-1625 BC),
Linear A exist alongside the Cretan hieroglyphic script, traditionally
so-called with reference to Egyptian hieroglyphics. Another offshoot
of Linear A, Cypro-Minoan, developed during the sixteenth century
BC though in circumstances which are not altogether clear. The
evidence points, in fact, to a powerful Minoan civilization whose
origins may well go back to the third millennium BC and which was
eventually extinguished towards the close of the second millennium
BC.
The upshot of all this is that archaeologists and historians have been
able to piece together a fairly comprehensible picture of what went
on in the area prior to 1500 BC. The achievement has merely served
to throw into greater relief their increasing bewilderment at the
subsequent course of Minoan and Mycenean history. Lor, in a
relatively short period of time — no more than a few
centuries — despite having reached a very high level of organization
and affluence, both the Minoan and Mycenean civilization
dramatically collapsed. Indeed, they disappeared in what appear to
have been curiously similar though separate circumstances: the
island Minoan civilization, including its Aegean satellite colonies,
around 1450 BC; and the more extensive mainland Mycenean
dominion around 1200 BC.
It has been suggested that the Minoan civilization may have been
destroyed by the Bronze Age eruption of the volcano on the island of
Thera less than a hundred miles north of Crete, and the southernmost of the Cyclades. This was indeed a major event. Volcanic ash
was scattered over a wide area of the eastern Mediterranean
including the Cyclades and most of Crete: we can gain some idea of
its violence from a comparison of Thera’s caldera with that of
Krakatoa. The latter is six times smaller yet in 1883, the
corresponding explosion sent a huge tsunami through the narrow
straits between Java and Sumatra drowning 36,000 people and
destroying at least two hundred villages. However the topographies
differ in each case, and there is no certainty that the Thera explosion
brought the Minoan civilization to a close: the latter continued
beyond the radiocarbon date of Thera (around 1500 BC) and seems
to have disappeared under quite separate circumstances.
Although the relative dating leading to this conclusion, based on
pottery styles above and below the ash deposits on Thera, is
comparatively secure, it should be kept in mind that the absolute
dating is less certain. The chronological yardstick to which all events
in the ancient Near East are currently synchronized as far as
possible, is the Sothic calendar of ancient Egypt. This is based on a
sprinkling of astronomical observations set in the framework of kinglists which come to us through Manetho. 32 As we shall see, the final
collapse of Bronze Age civilization in the Aegean extended
throughout the Near East and produced a cultural hiatus that may
have lasted for nearly five hundred years. The partitioning of states,
giving rise to dynastic overlap, is therefore possible and remains a
potential source of error in absolute chronology: it seems clear that
we should still keep an open mind as to exactly when the Minoan and
Mycenean empires finally disappeared. 33 However, none of this
makes any difference to the substantiality of the events.
On both occasions, the countryside and the towns appear to have
been devastated. As far as one can tell, the decline in civilization and
the deterioration of the environment were more or less
contemporaneous. Most Mediterranean areas were far more wooded
and fertile during the Bronze Age than they are today; the present
semi-barren state bears witness to a combination of destructive
factors during the period in question involving extensive
deforestation and virtual annihilation of the vegetation cover which
caused the topsoil thereafter to be relentlessly eroded. It is even
likely that the countryside and towns were destroyed on such a vast
scale that many of the inhabitants were obliged to migrate, leaving
only a small remnant after 1100 BC to populate and once again
cultivate the land.
Be that as it may, the city buildings, whether they were the earlier
unprotected palace towns of Crete like Knossos, Phaestos or Gournia,
or the massively fortified citadels of mainland Greece such as Pylos,
Mycenae or Tiryns, were devastated as if by earthquake or fire within
two periods of time which were probably no longer than about fifty
years, leaving the inhabitants on both occasions seriously weakened
and considerably depleted. Despite its extent, which embraced the
whole of Crete, the first of these occasions was probably on a lesser
scale. Indeed, it was the collapse of the Minoan civilization that
apparently provided the Mycenean empire with its principal
opportunity for overseas expansion and for two-and-a-half centuries
subsequently, its hegemony steadily grew until it embraced
settlements as far afield as Egypt, Cyprus, Palestine, Syria, Troy,
Cilicia, Sicily, southern Italy as well as Crete and the Aegean islands.
And yet, in due course, this civilization too was completely
overwhelmed. This time, however, the whole area was left virtually
devoid of culture for the subsequent five hundred years: essentially, a
dark age was created. Very little of the Mycenean civilization
survived and the whole nation evidently fell into a state of poverty,
illiteracy and ignorance. The population was not only severely
depleted, it descended to such a primitive level of existence that the
skills of writing and architecture were no longer practiced, indeed
were largely forgotten. There is a continuous tradition of pottery in
many places however, albeit at a more primitive level, whilst legends
and religious cults clearly also survive. Nevertheless it seems fairly
clear from this evidence that we are dealing with human disasters of
almost unparalleled magnitude, and one is left wondering what
natural or human agency could have influenced events on such a
devastating scale.
Plate 3(a). The actual layout of a Mycenean stronghold around
1250 BC, including the location of the royal megaron or small
central shelter or small central shelter (from In Search of the
Trojan War by M. Wood).
The fascination and enduring interest in the Mycenean catastrophe
obviously lies not only in the fact of a dark age and in the factthat it
was preceded by widespread and apparently terminal
destruction, 34 but in identifying what gave rise to the destruction.
Furthermore, the interest which historians take in the subject is not
purely for the sake of the Mycenean collapse itself. Throughout
history, periods of splendor and strength have been superseded by
depression and rapid collapse, many prosperous and powerful
nations having been wiped away in course of time, for example
China’s warring states, the Mayan civilization and the empire of
Rome; and yet in many of these cases, the causes of the decline
remain equally obscure. As already remarked, it is not known
whether we are dealing with some general rule relating to the
internal evolution of society, which has utopias selfdestructing, or
whether some additional external factor is being overlooked. Any
advance in understanding that relates to a particular downfall may
therefore have an obvious bearing on the general phenomenon and
hence the future of our own civilization. As one might expect, then,
all sorts of possible reasons for the Mycenean collapse have been
explored — crop failure and famine, widespread earthquakes,
massive invasions, proletarian revolution, inter-baronial wars, to
name a few — but although some of these may have played a part,
there is now an increasing impression that something which
transcends normal expectation may have been involved.
At first sight the problem seems more mundane: the Myceneans
apparently recognized and anticipated the forces that led to their
demise. It is a curious fact that, having replaced the Minoans after
1400 BC as the principal maritime-commercial presence in the
Mediterranean, feudal chiefs of the Mycenean nation during their
period of dominance and supreme power became increasingly
preoccupied with securing their defenses at home. There was
evidently some kind of awareness that the nation was coming under
siege since look-outs were posted and defending forces were
frequently mobilized in readiness for potential raiders. This activity
has even been likened to that of the Viking period in Europe two
thousand years later. Thus, although the Mycenean economy
apparently flourished and elaborate palaces were built at Pylos,
Mycenae, Tiryns, Iolkos, Gla, Orchomenos, Thebes and Athens,
many of these edifices were also protected behind massive cyclopean
walls. Attention has been drawn to the simultaneous revival of a
peculiar ancient practice, namely the construction within the walls of
the palace of a small covered enclosure known as a megaron, whose
access was commonly through a low-level anteroom, curiously
reminiscent of a modern air-raid shelter but of unknown purpose
(plate 3(a)). Yet all this preparation was apparently to no avail. For,
by the end of the twelfth century BC or thereabouts, all these
citadels, apart from Athens, had been destroyed and abandoned. To
what force did the classical Greeks attribute the destruction? There is
little uncertainty here: the invaders were called Heraclids?
Plate 3(b). Mycenean stronghold at Tiryns (photo: Peter
Clayton).
The context of the references to the Heraclids does not suggest that a
figurative or metaphorical connotation was intended. Local
rebellions or peasant uprisings following some breakdown in the
economy or failure of crops are not inherently likely explanations
therefore, even supposing the well-armed Mycenean aristocracy at
the height of its powers, and it’s almost impregnable citadels, would
lead one to suspect such an eventuality was reasonable. At the same
time, despite the traditions, the study of archaeological remains from
the end of the Mycenean age has failed to turn up any features which
can be attributed with certainty to invading forces: burial habits for
example and the weaponry employed reveal no significant changes.
Nor are there any linguistic developments which might suggest the
arrival of conquerors. Indeed the evidence, already commented on,
points more to a continuity of development going back to the
incursion of Indo-European speakers since 2000 BC. If the Heraclids
were understood, it seems that they could only have been phantomlike raiders from an unknown northern territory who did not remain
in any of the lands they overran.
In fact the whole of the eastern Mediterranean area (figure 1) was
also overrun and devastated during this period. Not only did the
Mycenean empire collapse, so also did its mighty Anatolian
neighbour, the Hittite empire. In this case, the capital city Hattusas
was engulfed in flames and destroyed as were the other Anatolian
cities such as Troy, Miletus and Tarsus. To the east, so also were the
main cities of the Levant, Alalakh, Carchemish, Qadesh, Qatna,
Ugarit; and in Palestine, many other urban centres were likewise
burned and ruined. So, quite apart from the events in the Aegean, the
prosperity and stability of a far more extended area came to an
abrupt end between 1230 and 1180 BC. The whole of this region
subsequently descended into a period of almost total decline and
comparative isolation whose intensity is truly hard to understand. In
the Aegean the Dark Age lasted into the eighth century BC and in
Anatolia almost as long. In the Levant the decline was less
pronounced but real all the same, whilst in Canaan the old
strongholds were fought over by the Philistines, Armaeans and
Israeleites. In the words of one authority, ‘the evidence is easy to see
in sacked cities, tumbled walls, broken communications,
depopulation and deprivation’. Only Egypt, no less enfeebled for a
while, managed to survive and maintain a semblance of civilization.
Here, there were merely the ‘interregnum years’, so called, some time
prior to 1200 BC. A posthumous summary of events during the reign
of the pharaoh Ramses III (1194-1162) starts with an account of the
preceding period in which it is clear that the breakdown was so
complete that years went uncounted and records were not kept:
The land of Egypt was abandoned and every man was a law to
himself. During many years there was no leader who could
speak for others. Central government lapsed, small officials and
headmen took over the whole land. Any man, great or small,
might kill his neghoubour. In the distress and vaccum that
followed there came a Syrian, a foreigner who set himself up
over the whole land, and men banded together to plunder one
another. They treated the gods no better than men, and cut off
the temple revenues.
Evidently we are dealing with an instance of total economic collapse
and general disaster, leaving society hopelessly exposed to incursions
form outside. But after the recovery had been made, Rameses III still
had to ward off ‘The Great Land and Sea Raids’ between 1190 and
1180 BC.
All at once the Lands were on the move, scattered in war. No
country could stand before their arms. Hatti, Kode, Kizzuwaka,
Carchemish, Arzawa and Alishaya. They were cut off ... They
desolated its people and its land was like that which never came
into being. They were advancing on Egypt while the flame was
prepared before them.
Then later: ‘As for those who came together on the sea, the full flame
was in front of them at the river mouths.’
The Egyptian records therefore supplement and bear out the
archaeological evidence in a remarkable way. They appear to
distinguish three phases in the sequence of events. First there were
the forces armed with a full flame who seem to have been an
undoubted threat. It would not be surprising if these were the
invaders who caused so much damage elsewhere. Then there were
the unwelcome refugees from the devastated lands to the north. Only
later was the pharaoh able to claim that he had succeeded in
overcoming both of these problems; and by implication; the
marauders who totally crushed the Mycenean and Hittite empires
were held at bay by the Egyptians.
Yet, despite the convincing corroboration from the whole of the
Mediterranean area, and the undoubtedly very real destruction,
researchers have so far been quite unable to discover who these
incendiary invaders might have been. The identity of the Heraclids in
modern times has become a complete mystery.
4 — The Sky Gods
Whatever one would like to imagine the Heraclids signify, there is
little doubt as to what the Greeks themselves, emerging from the
Dark Age, thought. They saw Heraclids as sons of Heracles and the
latter as a god.
At the same time, it also has to be admitted that the Greeks emerged
from the Dark Age rather perplexed over the exact genealogy of the
gods. Even as early as Homer (c. 800 BC) or Hesiod (c. 700 BC) their
heroic myths seem to have derived from a variety of
sources. 35 Indeed different poets, and even the same poet in
different passages, apparently preserve a number of very old
traditions. The ones about Heracles are peculiarly complex; the
elements absorbed into the tales of his exploits include conflicts with
primeval monsters, ambivalence in his own nature since he is prone
to fits of bestial frenzy, and his relationship with death and worldend. From the many adventures of Heracles, twelve came to be
selected as the tasks imposed on him by Eurystheus, the king of
Mycenae, and were depicted for example at Olympia around 560 BC.
It was said that Eurystheus, who was the son of Hera, Queen of
Heaven, feared and envied Heracles, who was the son of Zeus, and
hoped to destroy him by imposing on him twelve impossibly difficult
and dangerous tasks. Heracles however successfully completed the
‘twelve labours’, one of them being against the city of Troy. Six of the
tasks preformed for Eurystheus are located in the Peloponnese and
there is suggestion that the stories were originally about a
buccaneering feudal prince who may perhaps have been a real man.
Such evidence indicates that the earliest Greek stories (prior to 700
BC) inherited elements going back in some form to the period five
hundred years or so earlier when Mycenean warriors were in
contention across the sea. It seems therefore that, by the fifth century
BC, through the pervasive influence of the Olympian cult, notions
had spread throughout Greece which intertwined the exploits of the
gods with those of a few dimly perceived chieftains many centuries
previously. For most Greeks — not all — the Mycenean period even
came to mark the beginning of time itself, whilst Heracles became a
symbol of strength and immortality, the greatest heroic figure of
them all. He more than any other hero bridged the seemingly
impassable gap between the short and fateful life of man and the
unending splendor of the gods.
It was apparently through contacts further east that the early Greeks
first learned to doubt their homegrown wisdom. The Greek historian
Herodotus (484-430 BC) 36 for example, originally form Asia Minor,
remarked that:
In Greece, the youngest of the gods are thought to be Heracles,
Dionysos, and Pan; but in Egypt Pan is very ancient, and once of
the ‘eight gods’ who existed before the rest; Heracles is one of
the ‘twelve’ who appeared later, and Dionysos one of the third
order who were descended from the twelve. I have already
mentioned the length of time which by the Egyptian reckoning
elapsed between the coming of Heracles and the reign of
Amasis; Pan is said to be still more ancient, and even Dionysos,
the youngest of the three, appeared, they say, 15,000 years
before Amasis. They claim to be quite certain of these dates, for
they have always kept a careful written record of the passage of
time. But from the birth of Dionysos, the son of Semele,
daughter of Cadmus, to the present day is a period about 1600
years only; from Heracles, the son of Alcmene, about 900 years;
from Pan the son of Penelope — he is supposed by the Greeks to
be the son of Penelope and Hermes — not more than about 800
years, a shorter time than has elapsed since the Trojan War.
This is a rather confusing cocktail of divine appellations, but we can
put aside Semele, Cadmus, Alemene, Penelope and Hermes, all of
them merely circumstantial details as far as our present purposes are
concerned, and concentrate on Hermes, Dionysos and Pan. It is the
recorded uncertainty over their relationships that is of immediate
interest here, for it reveals to us how an informed traveler was
seeking to improve the rather truncated view of world history that
the Greeks of the fifth century BC still possessed.
Herodotus has been accused of magnifying the wonders and hoary
antiquity of Egypt in order to adorn his own tale, and there have
been suggestions too that his Egyptian informants were not without
some degree of national chauvinism. However, the chronological
sequence described by Herodotus is consistent in itself and does not
contradict what we already know. Amasis, for example, was an
Egyptian pharaoh whose reign may be taken as a relatively secure
marker, since it corresponds to the time, only a century before
Herodotus, when Egypt and Greece were re-establishing regular
contact after the Dark Age. There is evidence that the Egyptians at
this time were considered by the Greeks to be counting in months
rather than years, though it is possible also that the Greeks did not
fully understand the Egyptian reckoning of time based on extant
priest-lists going back to the first dynasty (around 3000 BC).
Probably, therefore, the Egyptian timescale should be reduced by a
factor of twelve or ten, although the exact figure remains unknown.
Be that as it may, Herodotus goes on to make it clear that the popular
Greek view relating to the arrival of the gods was in error and that
Heracles was at least as old as 1800 BC. We should also take note of
the fact that Herodotus sees nothing abstract or symbolic about the
gods: he discusses them as real things, with specific genealogies and
birth dates in a factual historical context.
The Greek view of the gods prior to the fifth century BC was indeed
quite matter-of-fact. The gods were still invested with great power,
moreover, and it was no less the custom in Greece than it had been in
Sumeria and Egypt for feudal chiefs to claim gods as their ancestors
and hence a divine right to rule. But among a people where it had
never been possible for power to be held by a single ruling dynasty,
such claims carried less conviction, and it seems to have been in
Greece that the status of the gods came to be first seriously
questioned. And from these doubts, there emerged a widespread
view, stated by Euhemerus, for example, that the gods must have
originally been real people who were later unscrupulously ennobled
to supernatural status by their devious descendants. On this
reckoning gods were a straightforward invention and the earlier
matter-of-fact view a delusion. Although it could have been that the
only invention was the investment of humans with divine rights, the
idea that the gods were truly real also gradually became less
attractive in the atheistic society that subsequently evolved in
Greece. It hardly seems likely that ideas would have developed in this
particular way if any visible basis for belief in real sky gods had
remained in the sky. Ideas did so evolve however and there is no
reason to be astonished by the matter-of-fact view of the gods
espoused by the early Greeks. It seems likely that the very earliest
Greeks regarded the Heraclids as perfectly real descendants of a
perfectly real Heracles.
Heracles was also given an ancient ancestry in a religious cult
ascribed to the probably mythical Orpheus. 37 Orphism was not at
first widely accepted in Greece but the traditions of its theogony
became well known eventually through the teachings of Pythagoras
(c. 530 BC) and Plato (427-347 BC), having spread along with its
associated mystery religion from Thrace into Greece. The stress in
Orphic doctrine on the division between body and soul, the
immortality of the latter and its possible reincarnation, suggest an
earlier Egyptian connection. The Orphic school is therefore likely to
have been quite ancient and there is some suggestion that it may
even reach back to the fourteenth century BC, having been brought
to the northern Aegean from Egypt by the fugitive priesthood of
Akhenaton (1367-1350 BC).
Apart from its mystic rites, Orphism was noted for its speculations
on the nature and relations of the various gods. One of the gods
belonging to this sect was Aion, of whom it was said that he ‘remains
ever unchanged by virtue of his divine nature, who is one with the
world, who likewise has neither beginning nor middle nor end, who
partakes of no change, who created the whole of divine, living nature.
Aion, according to ancient authority, was born out of Water and
Earth in the form of a snake with two heads, those of a bull and a
lion. Between the heads was the face of a god with wings on its
shoulders. The name of this strange deity was Cronos Ageraos
(unageing time) or Heracles.
In Greek tradition generally, Cronos was a remote primary god who
had originally produced everything, divine or human, out of himself
(plate 4).
Evidently then, there was some confusion over the actual provenance
of Heracles. On the one hand there were those whose beliefs may
have derived from the Egyptians and who saw him as quite ancient.
On the other hand there also existed the view that the world only
began around the time of the Trojan War, in which case Heracles was
considered to be relatively young. Heracles remained an extremely
significant deity on either account however, and we may assume that
the Heraclids were well understood by the Greeks generally to be
awe-inspiring figures, reaching back to the very source of creation
itself. That this should be so is an important clue to the nature of the
destructions.
Plate 4. Heracles. In late Roman times. Heracles was considered
to be identical to Ancient god of Time — Cronos — Aion, the
later being the equivalent of (a) Zervan, a winged god with a
lion’s head, in the Mithraic tradition; and (b) Phanes, a winged
god born of a cosmic egg, in the Orphic tradition. Note that
Zervan stands upon a world globe characterized by two crossed
bards (cf. Figure 3), whilst Phanes stands amidst the twelve
zodiacal signs, indicating that the egg has cosmic significance
(see Van der Waerden, Science Awakening II ). The topmost
constellation in the zodiac here is the Ram Aries (reprinted by
permission of Kluwer, Academic Publishers. Photo: the Bodleian
Library, Oxford).
The Orphic tradition also recounts how a god called Phaethon ran
amok and set fire to the Earth. Homer in fact associates Phaethon
with one of the labours of Heracles and provides a link with the
events surrounding the downfall of Mycenae. The word Phaethon
actually means ‘blazing star’ and it may even been another name for
Zeus, the principal figure of the Greek pantheon. According to the
Roman poet Ovid who wrote much later (around the time of Christ),
the chariot of the Sun was taken over by his son Phaethon who then
allowed it to wander from its course. 38 Phaethon failed to hold the
reins and caused the horses to ‘break loose’ and ‘rush aimlessly,
knocking against the stars set deep in the sky and snatch ... the
chariot along through uncharted ways’. Then:
the earth burst into flame, the highest parts first, and spit into
deep cracks, and its moisture all dried up. The meadows are
burned to white ashes; the trees are consumed, green leaves and
all, and the ripe grain furnishes fuel for its own destruction ...
Great cities perish with their walls, and the vast conflagration
reduces whole nations to ashes.
Apart from the description of processes which appear to have
considerable relevance to events at the close of the Bronze Age, the
reference to horses and ashes is doubly interesting because it is
strangely reminiscent of that story of a wooden horse which, on some
later accounts, specifically caused the downfall of Troy during the
Mycenean decline. This particular course of events was never alluded
to in Homer’s Illiad and the story is generally seen as a post-Iliadic
addition designed to reveal Odysseus as an unscrupulous strategist.
It remains conceivable however that the story is cosmological
symbolism with a basis in fact. The connection between wood and
ash is obvious, as are the cosmic connotations of the Phaethon tale.
The brightly flowing trails of fireballs, and the tails of great comets,
have been associated since antiquity with the manes of
horses. 39 Such visions in the dark sky are known to have always had
terrifying associations, a distant reminder of which lingers on in our
modem word ‘nightmare’. In Arcadia, Poseidon was worshipped as
the master of horses and was widely regarded as the instigator of
earthquakes as well as being the brother of Zeus. Orphic theogony
seems therefore to have an underlying naturalistic character and
reveals potential links between events which may have actually
happened and cosmic mythology. We shall be pursuing this link in
more detail in due course.
This early naturalism — the linking of events on earth with the
actions of the gods — is open to two interpretations, two models of
reality. One can treat the stories with disbelief because, of course,
supernatural intervention in the affairs of the world is absurd. Or one
can take them seriously, the supernatural or divine connotations in
this instance implying not the ghostly and the spiritual, but a
disposition on the part of some real phenomenon to be larger than
life and endowed with capacities beyond human control. It goes
without saying that most commentators in modern times have
selected the first alternative but if we now choose the second, on the
grounds that something real must have been involved in the
destruction of the Mycenean empire, then it will be necessary in due
course to identify with certainty that period, later in history, when
the meaning of divinity changed from the physically real to the
merely figurative. For the moment, let us explore the connotation
denoting realism a little further and see if it is possible to construct a
bridge between the Egyptian and the Greek cosmos. 40
Phaethon’s relationship with the Sun is, in fact, a rather unusual one
for the Greek gods. However, as we have noted, many aspects of the
Orphic tradition are suspected survivals from the fourteenth century
BC when they were first brought to the northern Aegean form Egypt
by members of the priesthood of Akhenaton. The members of this
priesthood adhered to the belief, radical in Egypt, that the Sun is the
All-father. Thus, there is no need to be concerned about the solar
aspect of the Phaethon story since it was generally foreign to the
Egyptian and Greek conception of the Supreme Sky God, at least well
into the first millennium BC. On the other hand, despite
considerable differences, there are also aspects of the Greek and
Egyptian traditions which show surprising agreement, especially
those concerning the way in which the cosmos was made and how it
subsequently evolved. These features in common might have arisen
when contact was established between the two countries after the
Dark Age, a possibility not generally given much credence by
scientific historians; 41 or it might equally be due to a joint awareness
of universal facts.
Both before and after Akhenaton, the Egyptians preserved a
polytheistic tradition; there was however a leading figure amongst
the gods. He was the ultimate source of existence, but He was
definitely not the Sun. Originally this creative power was known
under different names at the various cult centres in Ancient Egypt:
Atum-Re at Heliopolis, Ptah at Memphis, Thoth at Hermopolis and
Khnum at Elephantine. But He was essentially the same Being in all
the cults and recognizably the agreed source of a number of specific
great gods, Osiris, and Seth included, from whom there was believed
to have sprung later a whole host of lesser sky gods as well as living
things and mankind on earth. Indeed according to Memphitic
theology, it was even said to have been through the thought and
word of Ptah that the next generation of gods — the Ennead, which
included the sun god Atum — had been brought forth from the
primeval waters.
In these early Egyptian cosmological speculations, there was
something that can easily be seen as having anticipated later Jewish
and Christian doctrines. For example in the Fourth Gospel version of
Genesis one reads that ‘in the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God’. Furthermore, the emphasis
on gods and men who were fundamentally similar in character and
behavior, as well as having a common origin, anticipated in
considerable detail the cosmogony described much later by Plato. In
Egyptian theology as in Greek therefore, there is little doubt that we
deal with a cosmos in which the actions of gods and men in their
respective domains were thought to be identical, and in which the
relationship between gods and men was such that lives here on earth
were paid of some continuum that embraced life in the sky as well.
Now, in Egyptian cosmology, we have draw a distinction between
‘the world of the Horizon’, namely our flat earth (Geb), and ‘the
world of the Two Lands’ discussed earlier, which emerged from the
primeval waters (Nun) and which seemed to incorporate the Sun’s
path. The latter, which is of course marked in the sky by the
constellations of the zodiac, arched over and under Geb, the regions
of the living (Shu) and dead (Duat) respectively, exposing sections
known as Nut (heaven) and Nannet (counter-heaven). There is a
tendency nowadays to think of heaven as somehow incorporating the
whole of the visible sky but Nut was clearly envisaged by the
Egyptians as a strip or path stretching across the sky in an east-west
plane. It was said to be supported by four pillars from mountains at
the edge of the Earth but there is no evidence that these pillars
corresponded to the cardinal directions; rather it seems the path
simply had dual characteristics, as if it divided into two interwoven
strips. This dualism, associated with Ptah (the ‘Lord of the Two
Lands’) and, as we have seen, Osiris and Seth, is likewise often linked
nowadays with Upper and Lower Egypt but strictly speaking it
relates to upper and lower reaches of the Nile. The Nile was,
strangely, the celestial river of that name, commonly depicted in the
vault of the sky as the goddess Nut, alternatively as an immense cow
with a starspangled belly or as a milky way traversed daily by the Sun
and nightly by the personified stars or gods (Plate 5).
This distinction between the celestial and geographical Niles is one
that both classical and modern commentators tend to be very causal
over but it is one nevertheless that the ancient Egyptian worshipper
was not likely to misunderstand. Thus:
Thou makest the Nile in the lower world and bringest it whither
thou wilt, in order to sustain mankind, even as thou hast made
them ... thou hast put the Nile in the sky, so that it may come
down for them and make waves upon the mountains like the sea,
in order to moisten their fields and townships ... the Nile in the
sky thou appointest for foreign peoples ... whereas the (other)
Nile, it comes from the lower world for (the people) of Egypt. 42
The ‘world of Horizon’, namely our flat earth, and the ‘world of the
Two Lands’ were also not infrequently at odds with one another. The
state of great tension that was considered to exist in Egypt was thus
expressed in terms of the struggle between Horus and Seth on the
one hand and the pharaoh on the other, the latter clearly posing as a
mediator between the unified nation on earth and the divine forces
responsible for cosmic order. The point has already been made that
the divine forces were very real and even brutal so far as the
Egyptians were concerned since it was evidently not taken for
granted that the world was safe. To counter the dangers, the pharaoh
essentially became the stabilizing hub of the nation, uniting it with
the divine influences and controlling agencies of the universe, and
virtually turning into a cosmic figure himself. One can only assume
that the pharaoh, as a mere mortal, knew what he was about and was
able to secure unto himself this degree of omnipotence through
demonstrating a real ability to anticipate and avoid the recognizably
malevolent cosmic forces, whatever they were, either through chance
or skill.
Modern interpreters, of course, have tended to assume that these
malevolent forces were fictional and they therefore picture the
Egyptians as a rather gullible people capable of swallowing every
aspect of a demonstrably false and purely invented cosmology.
However, it is equally plausible, if not more so, to suppose that these
people were much like ourselves and that they may have been caught
up in events that demanded urgent solution and that, as usual, they
deferred to experts who came up with what appeared at the time to
be the most rational explanation of what was going on. If so, it is
understandable that the pharaoh should have employed a
professional priesthood and conferred upon it considerable
privileges and power as well as astronomical duties. And if the
cosmos forever remained beyond their capacity to truly comprehend,
then it is understandable that cosmological theory should have
developed or evolved sometimes perhaps by desperate edict from the
pharaoh.
Plate 5. In the writings of early Greek natural philosophers, the
heavenly path of the Sun was associated with the Milky Way. A
similar personification of the Sun’s path is found in ancient
Egypt where it is represented by (a) the star-spangled cowgoddess Hathor, later Isis (line drawing reproduced by
permission of Weidenfeld & Nicolson), or by the similarly
decorated mother-goddess Nut, not bearing (b) or bearing (c)
the solar barque as the case may be (line drawings reproduced
by permission of Crossroad/Continuum).
In the New Kingdom for example, the city of Thebes rose to
preeminence as the principal sacred city having absorbed various
cosmogonies (Memphite, Heliopolitan and Hermopolitan) and their
respective systems of gods. Its priesthood advanced the worship of
Amon-Re, the body and face respectively of Ptah who controlled and
pervaded the whole universe, together with the heavens and the
underworld. By this time, the concept of a single universal god was
making itself felt more and more, and no great principle would seem
to have been at stake when Akhenaton decided that Atum, the
monotheistic power manifested in the disc of the Sun, should be
exalted as the one and only god. Nevertheless, Tutankhamun
restored the succession under Amon-Re after the death of Akhenaton
and he was said to have ‘driven out the disorder from the Two Lands,
so that order was again established in its place, as at the creation’. It
seems therefore that just around the time the Minoan civilization
was undergoing its decline, radical changes were being introduced by
a new priesthood under Akhenaton which relate to priorities in the
sky. It is by the way that an error was later thought by the Egyptians
to have been committed at this time, though it is evidently important
to know that those responsible for the change incurred the wrath of
the people and subsequently escaped with their ideas to the Northern
Aegean where they seem eventually to have re-emerged as part of the
Orphic doctrine, in which the divine cocktail evidently embraced
some surprisingly naturalistic elements.
When we turn to early Greek cosmology, we find its various facets
closely resemble those of Egyptian cosmology. Thus the earth (Ge
rather than Geb) now appears as a vast plain encircled by a stream
(Ocean) resembling the waters of Nun in Egypt, from which the gods
and mankind had earlier sprung. Likewise, Heaven and Earth were
thought to meet at some points on the extremities of the horizon, at
the so-called pillars of Heracles, the entrance to the underworld
being situated in the west where the Sun descended into the nether
regions whilst the stars arose on the other side. There was also some
idea that Hades, the counterpart of the Egyptian Duat, could be
reached through rifts in the rocks at certain places on the earth’s
surface. The Greeks, like the Egyptians, did not at first consider the
universe and mankind to be transcended by the gods. On the
contrary, the gods shared human weaknesses, passions and
intrigues, and they were generally attributed no higher status than
conquering chieftains.
Somewhere in the background though was the rather remote figure
of Cronos who could be likened to the Egyptian Ptah. The
nineteenthcentury view that Cronos — the Roman Saturn — was
identical with Time (Cronos) has been considered some-what
questionable during the present century; however if Cronos was in
fact a recognizable body in an Earth-crossing orbit of short period,
there is no reason, in principle, why its regular close encounters with
the Earth should not in the past have become the basis of timekeeping in the form of a sacred calendar, with successive years
beginning in November, say, in addition to the one we now associate
with the solar year. Sacred calendars of unknown origin are evident
elsewhere in the ancient world (e.g. Mayan and Indian calendars).
On the face of it, then, there is no compelling reason why Cronos and
Time should not in fact derive from a common source in the very
remote past (see also plate 4).
Be that as it may, it is the creative role of Cronos that we emphasize
here. As with his Egyptian counterpart, a kind of dualism is
apparent. Cronos eventually fathered two band of gods, the horrible
Cyclopes and the rock-hurling Titans, who engaged one another in
battles, leaving the Earth sometimes as the unhappy but innocent
victim. It may be that the mighty Zeus and the very considerable
Poseidon (or Atlas) were the principal contestants here but in due
course, the former alone seems to have inherited the cosmic arena.
Zeus, who was certainly of the same generation as the Titans, and
who is now thought to be identical with the second-millennium
Babylonian God Marduk (see chapter 1), was also the main IndoEuropean sky god and weather god, combining the functions of a
nature god with those of the head of an anthropomorphic pantheon
mostly fathered by himself. From his exalted abode in Mount
Olympus, probably in the sky, this divine ‘cloud gatherer’ poured
refreshing fertilizing rain on earth, but he also blasted gods and men
alike with his terrorizing thunderbolts when they thwarted his
irascible will or frustrated his plans and purposes. Eventually
however, even Zeus became a less anthropomorphic figure and
turned more into a divine cosmic presence exercising his will
through more subtle and invisible means.
It is a difficulty confronting the mythologist that ideas about the
nature of ancient gods did gradually evolve. Nevertheless it is
possible to construct a general correspondence between the
Mesopotamian, Egyptian and Greek theogonies, thereby confirming
their basis in a common source or sequence of events. In the later
versions for example we are aware of variously named remote fatherfigures who eventually came to lose some of their pre-eminence: Anu
in Mesopotamia, Ptah in Egypt and Cronos in Greece. For both sets
of progeny fathered by the latter figures, a kind of dualism involving
an element of conflict was clearly significant, as were the new
dominant figures that emerged, Horus in Egypt, for example, and
Zeus in Greece. By the mid-second millennium BC however, the
supposed backdrop of events justifying the pre-eminence of these
gods was apparently on the wane, and the characters of Horus and
Zeus seemed to evolve further. Just as Zeus became less
anthropomorphic, so the guise of Horus adopted by the pharaohs
became the guise of Amon-Re, also a divine presence who apparently
pervaded the whole universe. The remoteness and pervasiveness of
these figures in due course seemed to supplant that of Ptah and
Cronos whilst the more immediate celestial stage of the preclassical
period may have been taken over by a powerful new god whom both
the Greeks and the Egyptians called Heracles.
In the principal wars of the gods as described by Egyptian and
Homeric sources, Heracles, as we have seen, was the offspring of
Zeus or his equivalent. The Orphic variation, if it did not arise from
an overlapping of stories, suggests that Heracles corresponded to a
reappearance in a new world of a very ancient god. Recurrence
indeed became a very important theme in Greek cosmogony but
whether it originated with the Orphic tradition, or is much earlier, is
a question for the historians and the mythologists. In general, it is
clear enough that the gods had offsprings and that there was a selfevident association between Heracles and Heraclids. Moreover, it is
evident that through the Homeric association of the Heraclids with
the downfall of the Mycenean nation, the god Heracles had every
reason later to become a more significant figure in the Greek
pantheon than he might otherwise have become. Thus the inherent
contradictions and uncertainties that unquestionably exist need not
be seen as a great difficulty for analysts but more the result of a
known evolution in ideas about the nature of gods in the preChristian era.
To put the developments in Egypt and Greece in perspective, 43 it is
now fairly clear that the gods and their creator were seen for the first
time during the third millennium BC as perfectly real bodies in the
sky who were primarily concerned in sorting things out for
themselves and only indirectly concerned with the fate of men on
earth. An important part of the creator’s work at this time was an
apparently visible world in the sky which lay close to the Sun’s path
and which embraced the Earth, a vision a probably no less awesome
than the gods themselves and a perpetual source of concern. Man’s
terrified attempts to appeasement, even to the extent of human
sacrifice in some quarters, were a somewhat desperate measure
whose efficacy remained uncertain. By the second millennium BC
however, the conception of things had evolved into a formal dualism
in which one particular great god, father of many others, was seen to
be all-powerful and basically benevolent, whilst another particular
god, also the source of many others, was no less strong but
essentially evil. Both sets of gods, the angels and demons of
subsequent myth, seem to have been looked on as members of a
visible milky way which evidently corresponded to the path of the
Sun rather than the Galactic system to which we now append to
name. These gods had characteristics which we now recognize as
cometary. Their history seems to imply the disintegration, over
several millennia, of a very large comet, the debris producing bands
of light in the sky and occasional devastation on the Earth. And orbit
taking the comet and its offspring along the constellations of the
zodiac is implicit in such features as the enclosure of Blackland, the
flight path of Phaethon, the association of the Orphic Phanes or
Heracles with zodiac (plate 4), and the otherwise inexplicable
classical references to the zodiac as a ‘milky way’.
Subsequently, during the first millennium BC, the malevolent gods
appear to have departed, leaving a single benevolent god who
became identified as both creator and director of a recurring
universe whilst at the same time becoming himself increasingly
remote and less tangible. The precise timing of these developments
may not be clear, but the gradual advance towards a new brand of
monotheism based on an invisible god who was also benevolent
seems eventually to have given rise to a controversial technical
problem, namely the true source of evil in the universe. The problem
was eventually resolved by removing evil from the sky altogether,
where it had always been, and treating it from now on as a
fundamental aspect of the human condition itself.
There need not be too much doubt then that the Greeks in general,
and the Athenians in particular, knew what the Heraclids were and
whence they had come: they were evil bodies and they came out of
the zodiac. But in their subsequent theological conflicts, nullifying
the concept of sky-borne evil, the Greeks seem to have convinced
themselves that the bodies did not exist. Let us now consider how
this came about.
5 — Renaissance
Solon seems to have been a man of exceptional ability. He is first
heard of during a critical period of the war between Athens and
Megara at the end of the seventh century BC when he persuaded his
fellow citizens to persevere in what seemed a hopeless contest. Then,
having saved the city from ruin and bloody revolution, Solon was
elected an archon in 594 BC and entrusted with the duty of drafting a
new constitution.
Solon appears to have been both just and liberal whilst giving
priority to restoring confidence amongst the manufacturing and
trading industries: thus he forbade the loan of money on the security
of the borrower’s person and he cancelled all outstanding debts. He
revalued the coinage so as to put Athenian traders on terms of
equality with their Ionic counterparts. He also abolished all
privileges of birth and instituted a public assembly, or Ecclesia, upon
which he conferred considerable power. It was a function of this
assembly to debate affairs of state and to establish through
democratic vote the natural, moral and public laws which were then
to be promulgated as decrees by the archons. Displaying unusually
profound wisdom and considerable practical ability, Solon seems to
have proved himself a remarkable legislator and it is a reflection of
his considerable stature and the veneration in which his memory was
held that his laws were duly inscribed on wooden pyramids which
stood on the Acropolis for many years. Indeed, they were somehow
preserved even until the time of Plutarch around AD 120.
In later years, Solon appears to have adopted the role of elder
statesman or ambassador at large for Athens. It is even said that he
exiled himself on puipose for ten years in order to avoid the
importunities of those who were urging him to supplement his
legislation with further clauses. Be that as it may, Solon travelled
widely, going as far as limits of the old Mycenean empire, to Asia
Minor, to Cyprus and Egypt, for example. We know from Homer’s
account that some of the invaders who had attacked at Troy also
found their way to Egypt and it may well be that a tenuous link with
the centre of the empire had been maintained after its downfall. The
account may of course refer to a link between Heraclids and SeaPeoples as much as between humans. Either way, it is known 44 that:
in the Egyptian delta ... there is a certain district which is called
the district of Sais and the great city of the district is also called
Sais ... the citizens have a deity for their foundress, she is called
in the Egyptian tongue Neith and is asserted by them to be the
same whom the Hellenes call (Pallas) Athenae: they are great
lovers of the Athenians, and say that they are in some way
related to them.
It can be supposed therefore that Solon had ample opportunity
through contacts with fellow counhymen during his visit to Sais
around 560 BC, to acquire an accurate picture of Egyptian
knowledge. There seem therefore to be rather good grounds for
supposing that a wise old priest of Sais whom Solon consulted would
have been a reliable informant and that what he reported would have
been scrutinize with the utmost care by the wise old mandarin from
Athens. It is at least possible therefore that we are dealing with
remembered fact and that we should take seriously what Solon
reported back to his fellow-Athenians on his return:
O Solon, you [Greeks] are all young in your minds which hold no
store of old belief based on long tradition, no knowledge hoary
with age. The reason is this. There have been, and will be
hereafter, many and divers destmctions of mankind, the greatest
by the fire and water, though other lesser ones are due to
countless other causes. Thus the story current also in your part
of the world, that Phaethon, child of the Sun, once harnessed his
father’s chariot but could not guide it on his father’s course and
so burnt up everything on the face of the earth and was himself
consumed by the thunderbolt - this legend had the air of a fable;
but the truth behind it is a deviation of the bodies that revolve
in heaven around the earth and a destruction, occurring at
long intervals, of things on the earth by a great
conflagration ... Any great or noble achievement or otherwise
exceptional event that has come to pass, either in your parts or
here or in any place of which we have tidings, has been written
down for ages past in records that are preserved in our temples;
whereas with you and other peoples again and again, life [had
only just] been enriched with letters and all the other necessities
of civilization when once more, after the usual period of years,
the torrents from heaven [swept] down like a pestilence,
leaving only the rude and unlettered among you. And so you
start again like children, knowing nothing of what existed in
ancient times here or in your country ... To begin with, your
people remember only one deluge, though there were many
earlier; and moreover you do not know that the noblest and
bravest race in the world once lived in your country. From a
small remnant of their seed you and all your fellow citizens are
derived; but you know nothing of it because the survivors for
many generations died leaving no word in writing.
This extract is taken from Plato’s dialogues Timaeus and Critias in
which appears the famous story of Atlantis. The Egyptian dates for
the founding of Athens and Sais, which were said to precede the
famous event, are respectively given as 9,000 and 8,000 years ago
which, by the typical reckonings of the time, as noted for example by
Herodotus or Eudoxus, imply 1450/1350 BC or 1300/1200 BC
approximately. Either of these is coincident with the period of the
Mycenean dominion. Moreover, as Critias reports ‘9,000 years have
elapsed since the declaration of war between those who lived outside
and all those who lived inside the Pillars of Heracleds’. Pillars, as we
have noted, emerged from a cosmic enclosure which separated
Blackland, including the Earth, from Redland, once the domain of
the destructive Seth. Thus the drowning of Atlantis seems to relate to
events observed in the sky at or before 1200 BC, the apparent
immersion of an Island of Creation in an extended zodiacal sea,
events during which mankind also suffered at the hands of invading
hordes from the zodiacal band. The Atlantic story deals then with a
seemingly visible assault from the cosmos whose structure was
broadly known, wherein there were gods from whom it was
customary to claim descent, and in whom it was customary to invest
overlordship and ultimate power. Critias was thus able to carry the
story back to an even earlier period in Greece and state how:
Once upon a time the gods divided up the Earth between
them — not in the course of a quarrel; for it would be quite
wrong to think that the gods do not know what is appropriate to
them, or that, knowing it, they would want to annex what
property belongs to others. Each gladly received his just
allocation, and settled his territories; and having done so they
proceeded to look after us, their creatures and children, as
shepherds look after their flocks. They did not use physical
means of control, like shepherds who direct their flocks with
blows, but brought their influence to bear on the creature’s most
sensitive part, using persuasion as a steersman uses the helm to
direct mind as they saw fit and so guide the whole mortal
creature. 45 The various gods, then, administered the various
regions which had been allotted to them. But Hephaestos and
Athene, who shared as brother and sister a common character,
and pursued the same ends in their love of knowledge and skill,
were allotted this land of ours as their joint sphere and as a
suitable and natural home for excellence and wisdom. They
produced a native race of good men and gave them suitable
political arrangements. Their names have been preserved but
what they did has been forgotten because of the destruction of
their successors and the long lapse of time. For as we said
before, the survivors of this destruction were an unlettered
mountain race who had just heard the names of the rulers of the
land but knew little of their achievements. They were glad
enough to give their names to their own children, but knew
nothing of the virtues and institutions of their predecessors,
except for a few hazy reports; for many generations they and
their children were short of bare necessities, and their minds
and thoughts were occupied with providing for them, to the
neglect of earlier history and tradition. For an interest in the
past and historical research come only when communities have
leisure and when men are already provided with the necessities
of life. That is how the names but not the achievements of these
early generations came to be preserved.
Notwithstanding the lacunae in Greek history for reasons which
Critias recounts, we appear to be the recipients, through Plato, of an
old, reasonably coherent, Egyptian description of the role played by
the ancient gods both in the sky and on the ground. The underlying
theme portrayed by Plato is that of a mighty empire subtly controlled
from the centre, a concept which at the time would have departed
from the cut and thrust of Greek feudalism. Plato’s main interest was
political analysis and much of his thinking did eventually provide
some of the inspiration behind the growth of the future Hellenic
empire. Fortunately for our present puipose, however, Plato was also
concerned to understand the astronomical phenomena involved and
he records how Socrates persuaded Timaeus to give a description of
what went on. Thus God began with a spherical body apparently
containing the elements of soul and matter; out of this creation, he
wove two circular bands, 46 similarly created but inclined to each
other, in which were created the various gods — not excluding the
Sun, Moon and planets — who were responsible for producing the
living things on Earth and imparting soul to them. Despite frequent
scholarly attempts to identify these two bands with more modem
imaginary circles on the sky (figure 3), namely the celestial equator
and the ecliptic, the account by Timaeus is quite definitely of
observed bands and real gods: it seems much more likely that the
dual structure of the former cosmic Nile is in fact being described.
Figure 3. In the Timaeus, the ‘body of the heaven’ is said to be
visible but it is also described as a strip of fabric cut down the
middle to form two bands which are bent into relatively inclined
circles fastened at their cross-over points, the celestial motions
associated with the inner circle being specifically described as
different, as would be expected for a body in an eccentric orbit.
One of these bands is said to include the Sun, Moon and planets, but
the latter had only recently begun to impinge on the Greek scientific
consciousness. Timaeus in fact indicates that he has other bodies
also in mind and if we are to consider his account in any way relevant
to other aspects of the Atlantic story, it seems that these other divine
bodies, rather than planets, must be the ones to associate with the
‘torrents from heaven’ that sweep down’ like a pestilence ... after the
usual period of years’. Thus, he says that ‘they are so bewildering in
numbers and so amazing in intricacy’ that many are ‘virtually
unaware that their wandering motions are time at all ... it is beyond
our power to know or tell about the birth of these other gods ... both
those whose circuits we see in the sky and those who only appear to
us when they wish’.
We have therefore from Solon an explicit statement that the
Mycenean collapse was caused by an encounter with a swarm of
astronomical bodies, giving rise to a great conflagration. The surprise
to Solon of course was not so much the facts, for the Phaethon story
was already well known, but the remarkably naturalistic terms used
by the old priest at Sais to described events which were commonly
regarded as the work of gods. The advocate of open government back
home thus learned that underlying the panoply of religion and
popular magic was an understanding of the world that needed no
recourse to divine agency: instead, man was just an innocent victim
of recurring encounters between freely moving bodies in space!
To what extent this particular contact catalyzed contemporary Greek
thinking must be uncertain; but the fact is that the first Greek
attempts to understand the universe in naturalistic terms, rather
than as something controlled by the caprice of the gods, date from
this time. These attempts began with a group of natural philosophers
from Ionia, shortly after 600 BC. Ionia, a coastal strip of land which
is part of Asia Minor, was geographically an interface between the
organized, conservative Mesopotamian societies and the less
centralized, more volatile Greek world. It was therefore a region in
which thinking Greeks would compare their own traditions with
those arriving from distant lands. However mere comparison of gods
and the like would not on its own have triggered the origin of natural
philosophy in Ionian Greece. Both Egyptian and Mesopotamian
principles had to be put into the melting pot. From this time the
Greeks, reared on a diet of Homer and still bearing the cross of the
Mycenean tragedy, determined to explore the material world and
expose it to the light of day. In so doing they began a process that
eventually gave rise to western civilization.
In these days when good and evil are frequently regarded as terms to
describe the moral choices made by individuals, it is difficult to
conceive of a climate of opinion in which they were absolute entities
ordained by a cosmic Deity. Yet if one is to appreciate the enormity
of the change that now overtook ancient Greece during the sixth and
seventh centuries BC, it is necessary to realize how deeply the old
viewpoint was impressed at this time upon the peoples of western
Asia, the Fertile Crescent and the eastern Mediterranean. The
ancient Egyptians in particular were outstanding in the interest they
displayed in the moral aspects of the cosmos. Thus in their complex
conception of the world, as we have already seen, the gods, the
universe and the sovereign ruler were inseparably combined in a
fundamental enduring principle: ‘the good and worth of which was to
be lasting. It had not been disturbed since the day of creation [and]
he who transgresse[d] its ordinances [was] punished’. Seth, as the
essence of evil, with the characteristics of the Devil, was certainly
opposed to Horus but collectively the gods were regarded as good
and the guardians of morality even if some might have malevolent
qualities themselves. Visitations of disaster on earth were thus
understood quite clearly as the acts of orderly cosmic gods upholding
the right and true. The peculiarity of the Egyptian ethos however,
which might not have been anticipated, was the extension of this
principle to everyday behavior for the purpose of maintaining an
orderly society. Thus, according to the Egyptians, it was the height of
wisdom to be just, righteous, godly and human; and it was supposed
that the ethical principles involved here, coupled with a sense of
social justice and truth, were provided individually through some
kind of divine consciousness. One was brought up accordingly to
accept that the gods were righteous judges having knowledge of
everything that took place and watching the actions of every man,
punishing wrongdoing and rewarding virtuous acts. Such was the
level of moral ascendancy implicit in this understanding of the
cosmos and the state that it was generally felt to be useless to try to
alter that which had been predetermined by the gods or to pry into
their intentions and decrees. Yet, underlying this superstructure of
state-imposed belief, as Solon was made aware, was a detached
materialistic view of the world without any moralistic connotations
at all.
In Mesopotamia likewise, and diffusing throughout the Near East,
the same fear of heavenly retribution dominated beliefs; but here,
there was less of a feeling that the gods were fundamentally good. As
in Egypt, every phase of existence — cosmic, civic, domestic and
personal — was brought within the orbit of the gods; that is, ethics
and religion were inseparable, but the emphasis in this case fell more
clearly on offences that were committed unwittingly. The public
attitude to the gods therefore was apparently far more ritualistic, far
more given to the belief that disaster would come regardless of any
human penitence. In view of such fatalism, there was less concern on
the part of the state regarding fundamental or private
beliefs — benevolent liberalism perhaps rather than benevolent
paternalism. Unlike the pharaohs therefore, the Mesopotamian kings
were not cosmic figures though they were still very concerned
personally to discharge their duties in the eyes of the gods by
maintaining the appearances of state order. Oaths may have been
taken at the temple or its gate, and referred to the judgement of God,
but the judges were not priests. The Babylonian code and the
administration of its legislation, even as far back as Hammurabi
(about 1750 BC), were essentially secular and made no claim to have
been divine pronouncements, in spite of their having been issued
with the sanction of Marduk (Zeus). The responsibility for the wellbeing of the state seems therefore to have rested more directly on the
king and he could thus represent himself as suffering vicariously on
behalf of his people, a fundamental notion that persisted through
into the Christian era.
The loose federation of Greek nation states never became a nation in
the modern sense, and Athens only achieved its dominance,
becoming a centre for the diffusion of culture, after the fifth century
BC. But in the actions taken by Solon, we see the early signs of an
inventive radically from that of the Egyptians, Mesopotamians and
other Near Eastern nations. Although there is no evidence of any
conscious attempt to turn away from pharaohs and kings, Solon
seems to have played the role of a head of state who wished to be
both a detached and disinterested figure. Civic affairs and the nature
of the material world, it seems to have been decided, were matters
now to be settled by rational and public argument. The responsibility
for the well-being of the state was to be shared equally, in such a
manner that the conscience of the first among equals was free. It was
a novel development, with the good fortune to be supervised over
two and a half centuries by men of genius like Solon, Pisistratus,
Cleisthenes and Pericles, but would it work? Indeed, would the
disappearance of the gods from the sky, real or imagined, affect the
result?
6 — Enlightenment
So long as the gods were real, visible and powerful entities in the sky,
mankind’s understanding of nature was likely to be in terms of their
complex comings and goings, their genealogies and fadings, and
their potential for capricious and devastating intervention in the
affairs of Earth. The corollary is that tales of the kind brought back
by Solon, in which the devastation involved not the arbitrary actions
of gods but the wholly natural action of bodies from space, would not
have been credible if these gods were still to be seen. The rise of
theory in the Greece of the seventh century BC, in which the cosmos
was explained in natural terms rather than through divine willful
action, could only have taken place if the sky gods themselves were
fading or had disappeared from sight. There was a struggle, of
course: Anaxagoras was exiled for casting the Sun as a red-hot stone,
whilst Socrates was executed for espousing invisible gods. But
eventually the belief in a single non-interventionist god was
established, together with the notion that nature was set to run on its
predestined course with only an occasional nudge from high. Again,
the rise of this movement could only plausibly have taken place
against the backdrop of fading, impotent deities. 47
The transition from myth to logic, from story to theory, was never
complete and did not take place all at once; indeed it is likely that
patterns of myth affected the patterns of rational thought with which
the early natural philosophers emerged. Thus what appear to be real
celestial events are described as a story, the end of Atlantis, by Plato
as late as the fourth century BC; and not unexpectedly, the earliest
theories of nature contain elements appropriate to a night sky which
was different from the one we see now.
Thales (625-545 BC) was traditionally the first of the natural
philosophers, but Anaximander of Miletos (610-547 BC) who
followed him is the first whose theorizing is preserved in any detail.
A recent reconstruction of Thales’ cosmogony runs along the
following lines: first there was a great ocean in which a circular eddy
developed and the Earth grew. Round about the air was driven by the
whirling currents whilst luminaries apparently soared upwards with
the wind and then plunged down again through the water. The whole
of this cosmos, which could run down and vanish only to start up
again later, was borne on the sea like a vessel, controlled and steered
by the water itself which, immortal and ageless, mover of things
outside it, shaker of the Earth, also has the attributes of divinity.
Anaximander, likewise, seems to have envisaged a ‘boundless’
medium but in his case things started with a fiery egg-like formation
out of the boundless, from which subsequently grew or separated off
various rings enclosing one another like the barks of a tree. These
rings, described as ‘temporary gods’, appear to have surrounded the
earth which was cylindrical in shape, being three times as broad as it
was deep, the upper face being where we lived. The whole of this
system then hung freely in space, remaining in position by reason of
its equal distance from everything else. The rings were clearly
understood as coming beneath the Moon and were like hoops of
compressed air, enclosing fire inside them, but with vents from
which the light of stars beamed forth.
It is difficult to see how such apparently bizarre ideas could have
arisen unless they had naturalistic basis. The notion of stars as
wheels filled with fire, with openings through which starlight is
emitted, is particularly strange to modem eyes. That these ‘stars’
were seen as the nearest of the heavenly bodies, closer than Sun or
Moon, is also strange because occultations of normal stars, their
sudden disappearance when the disc of the Moon passes in front of
them, are not uncommon and must have been known to
Anaximander. It may be then, that in these very early cosmological
speculations we are in fact detecting elements of a night sky which is
not the one we see now, and that here we have an indication as to the
nature of conspicuous bodies in the pre-classical sky which, like the
ancient gods, were subsequently to disappear.
The Pythagoreans at this time were already of the opinion that the
Earth itself was a star (presumably a planet) and that it moved
around a central fire designated as the Mother of Gods or the Citadel
of Zeus. It is possible therefore that the underlying picture was of the
planet Earth in motion around a central source of fire, and of this fire
displaying itself as stars shooting through a window in the sky
whenever the Earth crossed hoops of fire perceived as an extension
of the central source. Contrary to the usual belief nowadays, the
orbital notion of the Earth was probably well understood by the early
Greeks and was never forgotten. We certainly know from Cicero
much later that Nicetus of Syracuse considered all the stars to be at
rest and the Earth alone to be in motion; the same philosopher, he
added, had shown that the Earth, by a movement of its axis,
produced the same appearance in the heavens as if these were in
motion and the Earth at rest. Aristarchus of Samos (310-230 BC)
likewise anticipated Copernicus in almost every respect. Indeed, it is
likely that this viewpoint was already present in the time of
Pythagoras for he too conceived that a movement of the Earth about
its centre caused the succession of night and day.
The question is then whether identification can be made of a central
source in the ancient sky, containing within itself hoops of fire. There
is no evidence that the Pythagoreans looked upon the central fire as
the Sun, and the only plausible alternative, if they had a real object in
mind, is the zodiacal cloud. Often overlooked by modern scholars,
the zodiacal cloud is a discus-shaped swathe of comet dust through
which the planets constantly move and whose most concentrated
region is visible in good climates close to the Sun after dusk and
before dawn. At the present time it can be seen as a pillar of light no
less bright than the Milky Way, the pillar appearing close to the
vertical in equatorial latitudes. If the zodiacal light were at one time
much brighter, and contained decaying comets within it, then it
would be seen to contain structure, and the Earth in the course of its
orbit would run through these structures, or ‘hoops of fire’,
sometimes to spectacular effect. In this connection it is of interest to
mention a conjecture attributed to Democritus of Abdera, who lived
about 450 years before Christ, and whom Seneca designates as the
most subtle of all the ancients. According to Seneca, this writer held
that there were many bodies circulating about the centre of the
universe but invisible to us on account of the obscurity of their light
or their positions in their orbits.
Plate 6. Visible debris from Encke’s Comet or its progenitor: the
Zodiacal Light from South Africa, 7 June 1843, as drawn by the
Edinburgh astronomer Charles Piazzi Smyth. The light is aligned
along the path of the zodiacal constellations, and was the track
along which, in remote antiquity, active comets from the Ence
material moved (by kind permission of Don Africana Library,
Durban, South Africa).
It is not unlikely that Pythagoras gained much of his knowledge from
the Babylonian school (chapter 1); and although the initial
conception of an Earth-centered world is now popularly associated
with the very ancient civilizations, Seleucus, a distinguished Greek of
the Babylonian school a century after Aristarchus, was still
maintaining quite correctly that the Earth not only had a diurnal
rotation but also an orbital motion around the Sun. We cannot
therefore exclude the possibility that the Babylonians of this period
always had a reasonably accurate impression of the underlying
structure of the Solar System which somehow became distorted in
the hands of the Greeks. It could not have been an impression that
was ever in the forefront of Babylonian thinking however, for if our
understanding of the pre-Socratic philosophers is correct, the
Babylonians and others of the period would have been preoccupied
with meteors and fireballs and their association with comets. Indeed,
if they understood meteors and fireballs correctly, as the products of
dying comets in hoop-like orbits that were no longer visible, there
would have been a quite natural awareness of ‘hidden stars’ coming
between us and the Moon. Something of this knowledge may have
been preserved in the teaching of Anaxagoras (c. 500-428 BC) for he
held that the Earth is flat but:
that the Sun and Moon and all the stars are fiery stones carried
round by the rotation of the aether. Below the stars are the Sun
and Moon and also certain bodies which revolve with them but
are invisible to us ... The Moon is eclipsed by the Earth screening
the Sun’s light from it and sometimes, too, by the [other,
invisible] bodies below the Moon coming in front of it.
In fact, the pre-Socratic philosophers generally, drawing upon
Egyptian, Babylonian, Persian and other ancient sources, appear to
describe a world that came into being through the production and
concentration of four elements (fire, air, water, earth) from the
original undifferentiated mass or cosmic egg. The world formed of
these elements was basically a temporary flat system in the zodiac. It
included the flat Earth surrounded by the Ocean. The Ocean
surrounding the Earth was supposed to be continuous with the sky
or ‘waters above’. A succession of such worlds was apparently
envisaged, each manifestation being in due course destroyed and
returned to the so-called ‘boundless’.
It is remarkable that this is exactly the picture we expect for an
extended series of enhancements of the zodiacal light (plate 6) by a
disintegrating comet. The disintegration of a major comet or its
offshoots injects a large mass of dust into the zodiacal cloud, and
since the latter is seen by reflected sunlight, the result is a temporary
increase in its observed brightness. Rare giant comets, orbiting in the
inner planetary system with periods of only a few years, are a likely
major source of such debris although no such active comet is visible
at the present time (see chapter 10). These early accounts may
nevertheless be understandable as attempts to describe the process
by which an active comet of this kind periodically enhanced the
zodiacal light at some past epoch, creating clouds of debris which
slowly spread along the constellations. In fact, there are several
indications that the earliest references to the Milky Way are
descriptions of an intense zodiacal light and that it, too, was able to
reach below the Moon. It was held, for example, that the Milky Way
was formerly the path of the Sun or that it lay in the Earth’s shadow
produced by the Sun. Furthermore, it was a hot accumulation of the
disintegration products of many comets. 48
Jets issuing from rotating wheels of fire; bodies coming between
Moon and Earth; temporary ‘worlds’ forming in the plane of the
zodiac: it seems reasonable to conclude that the earliest philosophers
were describing, perhaps from the experience of their forebears, an
essentially correct association between cometary disintegration
products and the formation of a luminous dust cloud in the plane of
the ecliptic, albeit one which was also supposed to come between us
and the Moon. We are beginning to see, perhaps, hints of a night sky
which was not the one we see now; and perhaps even clues to the
nature of the Heraclids. The gods and their thunderbolts, now on the
wane, were merely comets and fireballs entering a less active phase.
Until recently, it has been assumed that statements about the cosmos
provided by the pre-Socratic natural philosophers are best
understood in terms of planetary rather than cometary phenomena
were directly observed or whether the knowledge of such phenomena
was derived from earlier historical sources no longer extant.
Obviously the Pythagorean link might have been important here,
providing an input of knowledge from very early Babylonian sources.
On the other hand, if the destructions of the Minoan and Mycenean
civilizations (chapter 3) bear witness to a then fairly recent but
substantial comet disintegration in the sky, it is to be expected that
some fairly major debris would have enhanced the putative Milky
Way in the zodiacal during the Dark Age, that is, during the previous
several hundred years. As we know, these phenomena would then be
no earlier than the exploits of Heracles and the Heraclids: historical
sources relating to these phenomena would then in principle be no
less accessible than the sources available to Homer and Hesiod.
If the sky was in fact different in the first millennium BC and before,
this might also account for the seemingly abnormal preoccupation of
nearly all the natural philosophers during the classical period with
meteoric phenomena generally. In the famous De Rerum Natura of
Lucretius (96-55 BC) for example, one finds that the ordinary facts of
astronomy or meteorology, the motions of Sun, Moon and planets, or
the incidence of frost and wind, snow and ice, are not really of any
great interest. The main focus of attention is the range of phenomena
believed to be associated with divine agencies, namely comets and
meteors, thunder and lightning, volcanoes and earthquakes, all
regarded as supernatural events liable to induce a state of
terror. 49 The Greek threefold classification of comets into ‘beards’,
‘cypress trees’ and ‘torches’, several kinds of the latter clearly
describing fireballs or bolide falls, is consistent with this view. This
focus of attention, far from being anomalous, may be evidence of the
enhanced fireball and meteoric flux during the classical period
associated with the recent evolution of a large disintegrating comet
or its orbit. It is true of course that by the end of the first millennium
BC, many natural philosophers had finally settled on the wholly
mistaken idea that comets and even the Milky Way derived from
some kind of terrestrial whirlwind, but they have also left enough
evidence to indicate that their imagined action of whirlwinds was
probably no more than an explanation based on well-known meteor
streams that extended into the sub-lunar zone.
For the most part then, the natural philosophers of the pre-Socratic
era seem to provide us with descriptions of the astronomical
environment in which the old Babylonian and Egyptian fears would
not have been out of place. Indeed there is no convincing evidence
that the model of the universe espoused at this time ever really
disappeared. Certainly Lucretius and Seneca, much later on in the
classical period, provide us with accounts of comets and meteors
which are wholly consistent with these earlier views and in general
agreement with our modern understanding of them. At the same
time though, it is also clear that cosmological thinking underwent a
profound change in ancient Greece and that this finally happened
around the fourth century BC. A new tradition of planetary
observation emerged, together with a new-found academic interest
in geometry and circular motion. 50
We might easily suppose the study of planetary movement over the
sky, like the rise of the new rationalism which had no need of gods,
was only likely to be pursued if the more awesome gods had been
banished from the sky; and the tradition can in fact be traced back to
the Pythagoreans in the sixth century BC. Indeed there is evidence
(table 4) that the planets were first given names after this time
though not, as it happens, the names of well-known gods. The latter
were only tacked on later and it says some things for the nature of
the more ancient gods that the planets then acquired some rather
artificial and quite inappropriate cometary characteristics. Even as
late as the ninth century AD, the Baghdad astrologer Kitab alMughni described Jupiter as ‘bearded’, Mars as a ‘lamp’, Mercury as
a ‘spear’ and Venus as a ‘horseman’ (plate 7). These terms may be
compared with those used to describe comets by Pliny in his Natural
History: mane, hair, beard, fleece, dart, sword, spear, cask, horn,
torch and crown.
Simplified tabulation showing the history of planetary names in
Greece, Rome and Babylonia. The Babylonian names are very
old but cannot be precisely dated. The attachment of the names
of gods to planets originated in Babylonia.
Column 1: divine names used in Greece at the time of Plato (430
BC);
Column 2: scientific names used in Greece in Late Antiquity
(after 200 BC);
Column 3: names of Roman gods attached to planets (after 100
BC);
Column 4: Babylonian scientific name; association with planets
possibly late
Column 5: Babylonian divine name.
The idea that the planets might be important only came into its own
however with the work of Plato and Eudoxus. The latter, in
particular, elaborated the explanation of orbits in terms of steady
circular motion whilst Plato emphasized the beauty and simplicity of
the geometry that was implied. Plato’s influence was considerable: he
held that the world was ruled by logic and that its structure could be
worked out by the application of pure thought. Even in the Timaeus
for example the gods did not destroy Atlantis capriciously but
through logical necessity. But Plato, as we have noted, still took note
of the ancient world-picture.
Plate 7. Ninth-century classification of planets from the work of
the Baghdad astrologer Kitab al-Mughni, where each is given
clear cometary characteristics. The descriptions used are: Top
row, left to right: bearded (Jupiter); lamp (Mars); spear
(Mercury); horseman (Venus). Centre row: giant (Sun); girl
(Moon); kettle (Saturn). Bottom row: circle, lamp, skewer, jar,
javelin (Princeton University Library).
The same can hardly be said of the radical Aristotelian cosmology
that followed, however. Plato’s pupil Aristotle (384-322 BC) took a
more pragmatic view of the world and the ideal of science which he
developed has carried immense weight even to the present day. As a
practical zoologist his attitude was basically empirical, and he placed
great emphasis on the more immediate evidence of the senses: ‘here
and now’ rather than ‘there and then’. The effect of this was to render
received knowledge less credible, the more so if it was not in
accordance with very immediate impressions. This then merely
served to hasten the degeneration of cometary gods into distant folk
memories, and in the cosmology which Aristotle developed, comets
did indeed completely lose their status as celestial objects along with
their portentous overtones. They came then to be classified as
somewhat ephemeral meteorological phenomena, no more
significant than a passing shower. Opinion at large was never
convinced of this newfangled mediocrity of cometary gods and still
looked on them with awe, but Aristotelian cosmology and its
sophisticated fascination with planets rapidly gained the ascendancy
in academic circles and, to the extent that state activity depends a
good deal on the accumulated wisdom of academics, comets ceased
to have any particular importance. To all intents and purposes, this
shift of view has persisted to the present day.
The strongest plank in Aristotle’s cosmology was his assumption that
the Earth could not be revolving around the Sun. He was aware that
any such motion would appear to displace the stars in the course of
the year — the phenomenon of parallax. Since the immense distances
of the stars were not known in his day, this rationale for a stationary
Earth seems valid, but to keep it in perspective it should be kept in
mind that the Copernican revolution much later was pressed without
the benefit of this knowledge either!
Another new departure in Aristotle’s teaching was the introduction
of a fifth element called aether which occupied the outermost space
beyond the Moon and which was more divine than fire, air, water
and earth. From it were formed the stars and planets, in their
respective spheres, which were said to be eternal and intelligent as
well as divine. It was also a natural property of matter to seek its
rightful place in the world, for example earth down and fire up, but
because the divine material of the stars and planets was already in its
natural state of perfection, the motion of these bodies was neither up
nor down. By implication the motion was in circles around the Earth,
and it was another logical element of Aristotle’s theory that circular
motion was more perfect than motion in a straight line.
Aristotle however did not regard the planets as we do today, as a
free-wheeling system; he thought they were interlocked and
ultimately driven by a Prime Mover whose sphere lay beyond that of
the fixed stars (plate 8); but the scheme, like similar ones which
came before and after, had many defects of which he must have been
aware. Thus planetary movements over the sky are somewhat
complex, being generally eastwards against the stellar background,
but sometimes looping in a retrograde direction; and their tracks lie
almost, but not quite, in the plane of the ecliptic defined by the solar
motion. To explain this complexity of movement Aristotle needed to
introduce 55 spheres for 9 objects (5 planets, the Sun, Moon, fixed
stars and the Prime Mover); an otherwise simple geometrical model,
even from its inception, was an elaborate and highly confusing
mechanism. Nevertheless, the disposition of matter in the universe,
conceived as being perfect above the Moon and imperfect below, was
obviously regarded by contemporary natural philosophers, as well as
those who followed, as so elegant and reasonable that it transcended
any detailed theoretical shortcomings. To be consistent with the
Aristotelian scheme of things, therefore, there was further good
reason that the erratic comets and the unpredictable fireballs should
no longer be part of the perfect heavens. Indeed, it became necessary
to dissociate comets from the gods altogether and relegate them to
almost the lowliest plane of all.
Although Aristotle then had for reasons of pragmatism and
theoretical elegance downgraded comets, and although there was, as
we shall see, a political dimension to the ‘planetization’ of gods, these
reasons only found favour at first in the Alexandrian school and were
overshadowed by the simple fact that the cometary gods had
disappeared. For as the sky gods faded, the myths repeated from one
generation to the next would become less and less comprehensible.
On the one hand the tales were plainly to do with celestial beings; on
the other hand there was a problem of identity. As time went on, the
only moving bodies left in the zodiac, apart from Sun and Moon,
were the planets. The planets were too few in number and too simple
in behavior to carry the rich complexity of myths; but they had
become the only candidates available. Inevitably then, the
transference of the celestial adventures of the gods from comets to
planets, for which the Greeks were primarily responsible between
600 and 200 BC, extended throughout the civilized world.
Plate 8. The Aristotelian planetary system as represented by the
Nirnberg Chronicle of 1493 (reproduced by permission of
Sotheby’s, London). The Earth (terra) resides at the centre of a
series of concentric spheres representing the other three basic
elements (water, air, fire), all of which, according to Aristotle as
he was interpreted by medieval philosophers, are associated
with their particular ideal levels. Beyond that are the crystalline
spheres to which are attached the celestial bodies: first the
Moon, then Mercury and Venus, the Sun and the outer three
planets, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. Next comes the sphere of the
zodiac and then the sphere of the fixed stars in countless
numbers. The penultimate sphere is Aristotle’s Prime Mover’,
whilst the final sphere is the domain of God and the Heavenly
Host. This was to remain the popular image of the cosmos long
after the investigations of Kepler, Copernicus and Galileo had
posited a quite different order.
The transition also marks an interesting change in the perceived
nature of the gods. Henceforth they appear more abstract, remote
and impersonal, so much so that some commentators remark that
they are no longer the typical objects of a religious man’s worship.
Thi s is not to say that Aristotle was basically a secular thinker
however for there are references to living gods to be found scattered
throughout his writings. The presence of these new characteristics is
more an indication that Aristotle was concerned to remove the
elements of fear and superstition from man’s relationship with gods.
He dismissed the old anthropomorphic deities of the Olympian
pantheon as mere myths and skillfully covered his tracks by also
insisting that ‘our ancestors’ did not purvey unmixed superstition,
having dimly perceived that a certain primary substance was divine
and that this primary substance was to be found in the heavens. Such
skill enabled Aristotle to maintain a worldview that did not fly in the
face of the ancient divinities but nevertheless made it possible to
ascribe, to the new-found planets, supernatural powers that
eventually went far beyond their inherent capabilities.
There was perhaps a degree of artifice in this line of argument, but
one should keep in mind the prominence given to open confrontation
and debate in the society of ancient Greece. 49 It has been said that:
the institutions of the city-state called for new qualities of
leadership, put a premium on skill in speaking and produced a
public who appreciated the exercise of that skill. Claims to
particular wisdom and knowledge in other fields besides the
political were similarly liable to scrutiny, and in the competition
between the many and varied new claimants to such knowledge,
those who deployed evidence and argument were at an
advantage compared with those who did not ... Examination of
the Greek evidence suggests that this very paradigm of the
competitive debate may have provided the essential framework
for the growth of natural science.
But if this is so, then it was words rather than observation, logic
rather than experiment, which lay at the heart of Greek science; and
we can be reasonably certain that it was Aristotle’s intention, as well
as his achievement, to mesh revolutionary astronomical theory into a
pattern involving new gods that most of his contemporaries would be
unable to dent by argument. Right from the start therefore, the new
planetary gods were provided with a secure rationale based on
perceived fact. But it was barely possible to have the one without the
other: Aristotle’s new cosmology demanded wholesale commitment
to the new, tamed gods in a state of heavenly perfection.
There was a political dimension also to the revolution. What, now,
was the role of the gods in human affairs? The dissension over this
issue went back to the very foundation of the Athenian assembly, and
it both fuelled and was fuelled by the lack of cohesion amongst the
city-states which frequently threatened to return Greece to the
conditions of the Dark Age. Inevitably, there were those who saw
definite advantages in promoting the new anodyne version of the
gods. As Karl Marx was later to recognize, there was a sense in which
the more sophisticated aristocrats of ancient Greece may have
perceived the potential benefits of treating religion as the opium of
the people. This attitude may already have been implicit in the
paternalism of the old Egyptian state but if something like the cosmic
pharaoh could not be reintroduced, sophistry would certainly permit
the trappings of religion and public debate to continue whilst a
privileged few, committed only to neutral gods, manipulated the
machinery of government and Academe behind the scenes.
The aristocratic Critias allows us a glimpse of these ideas in the
making when he suggests:
That a man of shrewd and subtle mind invented for men the fear
of the gods so that there might be something to frighten the
wicked even if they acted, spoke or thought in secret. To this end
he introduced the concept of divinity. There is, he said, a spirit
enjoying endless life, hearing and seeing with his mind,
exceedingly wise and all-observing, bearer of a divine nature. He
will hear everything spoken among men and can see everything
that is done. If you are silently plotting evil, it will not be hidden
from the gods, so clever are they. With this story, he presented
the most seductive of teachings, concealing the truth with lying
words. For a dwelling he gave them the place whose mention
would most powerfully strike the hearts of men, whence, as he
knew, fears came to mortals and help for their wretched lives;
that is, the vault above, where he perceived the lightnings and
the dread roars of thunders, and the starry face and form of
heaven - fair wrought by the cunning craftsmanship of Cronos;
whence too the burning meteor makes its way, and the liquid
rain descends on earth ... So, I think, first of all, did someone
persuade men to believe there exists a race of gods.
It is not to be supposed that these developments emerged in their
final form overnight. Plato and Aristotle were regarded with no great
awe in their own lifetime even though it was their explorations into
the realm of new ideas that ultimately broke the ancient traditions.
Nor must it be supposed that there was some kind of knowing
conspiracy between the aristocracy and Academe. Of course, it often
happens that some particular way of looking at the natural world
finds itself in harmony with some particular way of ordering society.
For example, in a longestablished monarchical state, it is easier to
see the natural world in terms of design and divine government; on
the other hand, in the ambience of a non-authoritarian democracy, a
natural world of order and authority might seem less plausible than
one of materialism, without divine intervention or design.
The assignment of cause and effect in such a situation is bound to be
an elusive matter. Nevertheless, with the benefit of hindsight, we can
now see that it was almost certainly Aristotle who, breaking away
from his mentor Plato, dissociating comets from the celestial realm,
and invoking purely circular motion for the planets on Platonist
grounds of elegance, appreciated that there could never be any
question of the planets coming into contact with the Earth. In
principle therefore, the Earth was safe and there was no ultimate
sanction on degenerate people by gods in the form of a cataract of
fire. Public opinion regarding the authority of sky gods might not be
gainsaid but it could be diverted, and more or less inevitably,
Aristotle’s Prime Mover became identified with the principal Deity
whilst the new planetary gods were regarded as exerting quite
illusory ’planetary influences’ across empty space, these influences
controlling events here on Earth. There therefore arose the essence
of a world view in which horoscopic astrology seemed perfectly
natural.
In this way, out of a very basic need on the part of rulers to invent
gods who corresponded as closely as possible to an orderly public
perception, several generations of Greek academics moulded a brand
new cosmology which was subsequently perfected by the
Alexandrian school and came to serve as the basis for horoscopic
astrology. It is a matter of history now that it took subsequent
generations almost two thousand years to unravel the complexities
introduced by the Aristotelian style of argument, and to recognize
the fundamental importance, for the purpose of arriving at the truth,
of dissociating the arguments of Academe from the requirements of
crowd control in the face of a perceived danger. It is often not
appreciated nowadays how this fundamental requirement had to be
learned the hard way.
Through an extraordinary combination of intellectual devices and
errors then, during a period of declining comet activity and
diminishing zodiacal cloud, which was nevertheless enhanced above
current levels, Pythagoras, Plato and Aristotle led their
contemporaries and indeed their successors to a seemingly plausible
and yet wholly erroneous view of the nature of the universe, based
very largely on a contrived understanding of the behavior of the
planets.
Of the various states which engaged in the war of 371-362 BC,
Athens, with the exception of Thebes, fared the best. However, the
actions of the Athenian government evidently became increasingly
arbitrary. Samos, for example, which had fallen into the hands of the
Persians, was conquered in 365 BC but instead of freeing her old ally,
Athens established an island colony by exporting a large number of
her poorer citizens. Those other towns which had come together in
league with Athens in 378 BC looked on in disapproval. So too did
the fiercely independent Macedonians who, though not very distant
kinsmen of the Greeks, continued in the four century BC to live a
kind of tribal life not very different from that of the Hellenes at the
end of the Dark Age. The Macedonian nobility were familiar with the
Greek language however and had adopted Greek names for
themselves such as Archelaus, Pausanias, Lysinachus and Ptolemaus,
as well as for their gods.
Foremost in the Hellenization of Macedonia had been their king,
Alexander I, who invited Socrates to Pella to instruct the youth. And
it was his great grandson Philip II (359-336 BC) whose inspiration
now began to turn the tide for the Hellenes.
Philip II was an unscrupulous operator who both admired and
despised the Greeks and their culture. He obviously took a pleasure
in outwitting his Athenian adversaries and nothing stood in his way
when it came to advancing Macedonian interests. Corruption and the
sword his favourite weapons, Philip rapidly dominated Greece and
brought Athens within his grasp. He also brought the great
philosopher Aristotle to his court in order to be the tutor of his 13-
year-old son. And the omnivorous appetite for knowledge which
inspired Aristotle and ranged over every subject from botany to
metaphysics and from constitutional history to moral philosophy,
seems to have influenced the young Alexander in no small measure.
A clever, inquisitive restless Greek mind was thus cultivated in a
rather special Macedonian pupil by a rather special teacher.
Upon the assassination of Philip, Greece knew little of the young
man who came to the Macedonian throne. But it was soon clear that
the power of Philip had fallen into the hands of a man even greater
than Philip himself, one of the most extraordinary characters that
Europe has ever known, and a man whose personality was to be
stamped on the history of the world for at least a thousand years.
There were other strains in his character besides that of the generous
knight; he had a strong infusion of the unscrupulous energy of
Philip: those who crossed his path or merely incurred his suspicion
he swept away without pity or remorse; and as he grew older, he
became as conscienceless as his father. But the quality which enabled
Alexander to leave his mark on history was his military talent. He
was heaven-born general, and was besides brought up with every
advantage that he could have desired.
The moment that Philip was dead all Greece gave a sigh of relief and
prepared to forget the Macedonians and recommence their usual
intrigues and wars. But before anything more serious was done,
Alexander swooped down among them with thirty thousand men at
his back, compelling the unprepared Greek states to elect him as
supreme commander of the Hellene confederacy. Within six months
he was back in Macedonia preparing to deal with incursions along
the northern frontier and assaults on the force which his father had
sent into Asia across the Hellespont. These latter were a source of
particular annoyance and nothing could be more inspiring to the
enthusiastic mind of Alexander than a crusade of Hellenism against
the Persian barbarians to the east. In the event, his invasion of Asia
Minor was followed by an early strategic withdrawal by Darius and
thus simply inspired even greater aspirations. Anatolia, Levant,
Palestine had all fallen to the conquering Greeks by 332 BC, whilst
Egypt capitulated without a blow: its inhabitants regarded the
Macedonians as deliverers from the Persian yoke against which they
had long striven. Alexander made a triumphant entry to Memphis
and then sailed down the Nile to its western mouth where, struck
with the capacities of the spot, he drew out a plan for the foundation
of a great maritime city and christened it by his own name. Thus
came into being the seaport of Alexandria, one of the most enduring
and famous of all the monuments which Alexander reared for
himself.
Whilst staying at Alexandria, the new king resolved to visit the
famous oracle of Zeus Ammon in the Libyan desert. With a
handpicked regiment of troops he marched for five days across the
sands, and came in safety to the palm groves of the fertile oasis
which sheltered the temple of god. The oracle wisely hailed him as
the son of Zeus, and bade him go forth and conquer all the world, for
none would be able to withstand him till the day when he should be
taken up to the gods. His company were then bidden to salute him as
more than a mortal, and to offer him sacrifice. This hyperbolical
flattery seems to have turned the head of Alexander: it was noted
that he took the oracle in all seriousness, and was in future much
please when anyone saluted him as the son of Ammon.
In the spring of 331 BC, Alexander retraced his steps through Egypt,
Palestine and Syria, crossing the Euphrates and the Tigris and
advancing into Persia. By now, no one doubted that he was the ‘great
king’, Darius being no more than a luckless pretender, and the
Persian realm soon fell. Meanwhile, Alexander’s pride and vanity
knew no limit; he took to assuming divine honours as his right,
dressed himself, to the suiprise of his comrades, in the purple robe
and tiara of an eastern king, and surrounded his person with oriental
courtiers. But by the time of his early death, Alexander had
completely transformed the outlook of the Greeks. The Macedonian
conquest of the East revolutionized the relations of the little Hellenic
states both with each other and with the outer world. The old system
of local autonomy and constant wars to maintain the balance of
power had now become impossible. What could be more inspiring
than to see the old Hellenic genius for colonizing was not extinct; to
behold the conquerors laying hands on every province from the
Aegean to the Indus, and covering them with Greek cities as great
and as vigorous as any that had existed in the Hellenic fatherland? In
due course, under the firm management of one of Alexander’s
generals, Ptolemy Soter, who ruled from 305 to 283 BC, the city of
Alexandria became the seat of the new Hellenism. The famous
Museum and Library of Alexandria were set up under Ptolemy, and
the scientific enterprise shifted from mainland Greece towards
Alexandria.
However, as the customs of local autonomy familiar to the Greeks
gave way to those of a more centralized regime, the head of state was
able to take on many of the trappings of a divine, cosmic ruler, a type
familiar to the Egyptians. There was a difference between the new
cosmic ruler and the older archetype, however, for this was no longer
a head of state conscious of gods exercising an ultimate sanction in
the form of cleansing cataracts of fire. The sanctions now exercised
were mere planetary influences, and invented ones at that. If these
were to be effective, the interests of state religion, public order and
Academe clearly had to be intertwined. This may have assisted the
purposes of government but questions of natural truth were now
vulnerable since they risked becoming matters of appearance for the
sake of public order.
In fact, it is now known that the scientific purpose of the Aristotelian
system in the hands of the Alexandrian school which followed was to
‘save appearances’, 51 and that it also had theological connotations
which, if Strato’s stage-managed miracles are not misunderstood,
were attributable to a wholly invented divine control. Strato invented
the science of pneumatics, his knowledge of which he exploited to
counterfeit, in a variety of mysterious ways, the turning of water into
wine and the mysterious movements of idols across the altar, these
and other effects being designed to deceive the worshipper. It is no
accident therefore that in trying to account for the motions of the
planets over the sky, geometrical models were constructed with little
or no concern for whether they might be true!
The continuing failure to find a theory of the planetary system had
far-reaching effects of which the most serious was a strengthening of
the theological aspects of astronomy. Where Aristotle himself may
well have wished to treat the universe as a purely mechanical system
with only a Prime Mover as the solitary theological element, under
the influence of the Alexandrian school, every aspect of the heavens
tended to become an object of worship. Now, however, the heavenly
gods were not comets but planets. Moreover the critical phases of
human existence came to be ascribed to a remote action on the part
of these ‘new’ planetary gods, which was elaborated in terms of the
quite imaginary theoretical structure now know as horoscopic
astrology. Horoscopic and omen astrology were indeed quite
different. Whereas the latter began as an honest attempt to
anticipate the effects of real encounters between meteor streams and
our planet, the former was an attempt in the name of science to
confer realism on an imagined planetary process. Horoscopic
astrology eventually found its highest expression in the works of the
Alexandrian scholar Claudius Ptolemy (AD 100-165), known as the
Almagest and the Tetrabiblos, which is a systematic exposition of
astrology, regarded nowadays as an aberration outside the main
stream of science. But, of course, the physical picture was
fundamental; and it was not until the basically irrational character of
wholly invented astrological forces’ acting at a distance’ had been
uprooted by the Cartesian philosophers sixteen hundred years later,
in the wake of the exposure of Aristotle’s various misconceptions by
Copernicus, Bacon, Tycho, Kepler and Galileo, that any major new
advance in science and mathematics could be made. It is well
understood now that the long dominance of horoscopic astrology,
and the slow progress of science over this time, has its roots in the
failure of the Greek experiment with rationalism; what has not been
appreciated, until recently, however, is that in creating the planetary
gods, the Greeks also diverted attention from the catastrophic
actions of the real celestial gods as expressed in the oldest tales.
By the seventeenth century, despite misgivings on the part of the
Church, it was accepted amongst astronomers that there was a
definite need to simplify the system of concentric crystal spheres
carrying the planets and that it was necessary to put the Sun in the
middle. In order to explain the complexities of planetary motion,
Descartes replaced the whirling glass spheres with a Sun-centred
system of transparent fluid vortices in the heavenly ocean, an idea
which Newton subsequently endorsed and sought to express in
precise mathematical form: a theory for the planetary system did
then at last arrive. 52 From this juncture the writing was on the wall
for horoscopic astrology; further, with comets again in the celestial
domain and perceived as an impact hazard, there was once again a
basis for omen astrology and its catastrophic perception of the oldest
myths.
Indeed, as we shall see, the arrival of two bright comets in 1680 and
1682 almost shattered the carefully nurtured Aristotelian dream, and
there followed a period of considerable intellectual ferment. Newton
however saw a way out of the difficulty, and the brief opportunity for
a new understanding of ancient history passed. In its essentials,
Newton’s new-look Aristotelian scheme, in which the Earth moves
untroubled by some cosmic forces, has survived to the present day.
However, before we reach this phase, we have to understand how it
is that the Christian Church took on the Aristotelian banner.
7 — Doomsday
The spasmodic disintegration of a particularly impressive comet,
then, could well have been responsible for a series of disasters in the
Mesopotamian and Egyptian civilizations during the third
millennium BC, and then again for a subsequent series of disasters
inflicted upon the Minoan and Mycenean civilizations during the
second millennium BC. Catastrophes of this sort, delivered by visible
celestial gods, are completely outside modern experience, but it is
clear - that they could have been a major reason for the
preoccupation with, and dread of, the sky manifested by the earliest
civilizations.
Conversely, by the middle of the first millennium BC (around the
time of Socrates), when these encounters had become less frequent,
the capacity of the visible cometary debris to do any harm must have
been called into question. It is plausible to suppose that in these
more quiescent circumstances a new outlook on the world would
come to the fore, one familiar to the modem era, in which moral
sanctions were now provided by civilizations themselves rather than
by way of thunderbolts hurled by the gods. Amongst those so
committed, the tendency must have been to assume that the world
was safe from celestial visitation.
At the same time old ideas die hard and it is also plausible to suppose
that the fundamental change of world-view enforced by the
appearance of the sky was not instantaneous and that it became a
source of conflict and debate. Indeed if the timescale of the debate
were comparable with that over which celestial activity reaching
some kind of peak during the centuries immediately before Christ
(see figure 4), such conflict and debate would be intensified, simply
delaying for a while any widespread conclusion that the world is safe.
This account of the course of cosmic events places the pre-and
postSocratic periods at Athens in a new light. Thus it is possible to
detect some degree of exasperation in Athens with the failure to
relinquish the old, mythical gods, so much so that Macedonian
aristocrats were caused to embrace a new, more impotent supernatural power and impose their will upon a vast new (Hellenic)
empire. Indeed the particular new view of the world which the
Macedonians espoused, in which the gods were a kind of image to be
exploited to the advantage of the state, almost certainly flourished
only because of their ability to defy their homeland and carve out
their own ‘brave new world’. Further, it was only a matter of time
before the rapidly expanding Roman Empire engulfed Greece and
Egypt and itself absorbed the new ‘world-view’.
Figure 4. diagrams illustrating the apparent enhancement of
fireball activity (a) during the late Babylonian period (based on
recovered ephemerides and monthly records on cuneiform
tablets); and (b) during the Chinese Tang dynasty (based on
recorded fireball and comet observations, where the commonest
fireball radiants during the eleventhcentury peak arise from the
Taurid meteor stream). In interpreting these apparent surges
account must be taken of variation in the attention given to the
sky by astronomers at different epochs (see also The Origin of
Comets by M.E. Bailey and the authors). Also relevant is the
location of astronomers, the increasing trend in the observed
number of comets per century apparently reflecting the spread
of professional astronomical practice from the Chinese (C) to the
Japanese (J) and Koreans (K) before the introduction of the
telescope (T).
It may be no coincidence that the periods immediately after Socrates
and Christ — after 450 and 0 BC respectively — saw the eventual
flowering of academies in Athens and Alexandria respectively, which
sought to provide an understanding of the natural world within the
constraints of a selected ‘world-view’. In each case, there was a
tendency to enforce the chosen world-view by strict adherence to
particular party lines. The centre of learning at Alexandria, for
example, right from the start, had a certain transatlantic opulence,
reflecting its status in this brave new world, and a deference to the
agreed cosmological view which was bound up with the stability of a
state controlled by a ruling oligarchy. To hold alternative views was
therefore to risk not just scientific error, but heresy. The state
increasingly assumed a new inquisitorial role.
The pressure to conform with the new Aristotelian world-view was
therefore very strong, and we may safely assume that most unwanted
history and ancient knowledge was relegated to the mythological
dustbin. No longer was there any significance in Atlantis, no longer
did bodies exist revolving in heaven that brought destruction to the
Earth at long intervals by a great conflagration. Eliminated also was
any vestige of the old dualism in the sky between the forces of good
and evil. All that remained eventually was an old benevolent Zeus,
underscored by Aristotle’s principle of order and harmony, the Prime
Mover, contending with a malevolent ‘necessity’ invented by Plato
and located here on Earth. According to theory therefore, all
movement and good had to be attributed to the Prime Mover whilst
sloth and evil were to be counted as fundamental aspects of matter
and human life, as necessary elements of the lowest level in the
cosmos. This combination of evil with human nature emerges now as
a fundamental notion, creating a facet of theology that seemed to be
in excellent accord with human experience. Indeed, the specially
invented new religion now emanating from Alexandria, the so-called
cult of Serapis, 53 was able to present itself in a new guise as an agent
of reform, an active missionary force on the side of good. In the
hands of an Alexandrian trained priesthood, armed with its
pantheon of planetary gods and stage-managed miracles, the temples
of Serapis spread widely throughout the Near East and looked set to
embrace the world!
It seems however that the cult of Serapis displayed rather too
obviously its aristocratic connections; it was perhaps too concerned
with imposing good habits and not enough with offering reward or
hope in a frightening world. In this respect the concern was still with
the seasonal flux of meteors and fireballs, and the anticipation of
catastrophe and world end. Prophets of doom, as of old, were still
prevalent. On the other hand, there were the commissioners of
organized religion who practiced horoscopic astrology and invoked
the new Aristotelian doctrines based upon the supposed influence of
the planets. Their concern was more with calming public fear and
expressing the essential good will of God. Based, it seems, on
formulae of apparently proven success, both the trappings of
organized religion and the fundamentals of theology throughout the
Near East seemed to develop a certain degree of uniformity:
monotheism, astral influences, miracle-working and so on.
Out of this melting pot, there emerged some kind of pattern, a
division of belief in the community between horoscopes and omens
polarized more or less along class lines. The upper and middle
classes seem to have favoured the more cerebral Hellenistic cults
whilst the lower orders remained with the more traditional beliefs.
This division may well explain why the struggle for supremacy
persisted for so long, but we must not overlook the influence of the
sky: 54 it is well known to us through Chinese records, also
supplemented by those of the Babylonians (figure 4(a)) and the
writings of classical authors, that there was a significant
enhancement of meteoric activity towards the end of the first
millennium BC, starting perhaps around 250 BC and continuing for
some decades into the following era as well. There were, it seems,
markedly increased expectations of an impending world-end at this
time which continued unabated for much longer than a century.
It was amongst members of the Christian cult that the expectation of
world-end emerged eventually with the greatest force. To follow this
development, we have to examine the evolution of ideas in one of the
countries closest to the centre of the Hellenic empire, namely
Judea. 55 Originally Judaic cosmology exactly mirrored that of
Greece and Egypt and was probably of Mesopotamian origin: here
too there was a flat earth with ‘waters’ above and below (figure 5);
here too there had been a great struggle in the sky between deified
figures, Behemoth and Leviathan; and here too, the dualism had
evolved until in the midsecond millennium BC, it was a wellintentioned Yahweh and a not-sowell-intentioned Satan who were in
contention. However, if there was a difference that eventually set
Judaism apart from other religions in the Near East, it was in the
fierceness of the attachment between Yahweh and his devotees. This
variation on an otherwise common theme arose amongst the Jews at
the time of their escape from Egyptian bondage when certain cosmic
forces were said to have wreaked destruction upon their
captors. 56 Hence-forth the Jews regarded Yahweh as their particular
protector and themselves as His chosen people.
The special relationship was deepened by the intense isolationist
policy of subsequent leaders. Nevertheless by the closing centuries of
the previous era, doctrine had divided, as it had at Athens and Rome,
along more or less devil-may-care (epicurean) and severe doomladen (stoic) lines, represented locally by the Pharisees and
Sadducees. Under the liberating influence of the Hellenic and Roman
domination however, there also emerged many prophet-led sects of
which the Mandean, Gnostic, Essene and Hermetic seem to have
been the most significant. Later, all reference to the teachings of
these sects was to be systematically suppressed, so it is difficult now
to get proper appreciation of their importance; authorities like
Josephus and Pliny for example, in the first century AD, gave them
only passing mention. Each sect however was characterized by
esoteric doctrines including the customary angelology, eschatology
and (omen) astrology, as well as a sacred literature.
The Essenes in particular appear to have drawn their doctrines from
a Mesopotamian source, bringing with them a Zoroastrian dualism
in which man was affected in equal measures by the sons of Light
and Darkness. Zoroastrianism was an important near-Eastern
religious movement in the middle of the first millennium BC,
ultimately of Iranian origin. Led by ‘magi’, it subscribed to Ahura
Mazda as the sole, benevolent creator of the Universe. It also
postulated primeval twin spirits, Spenta Mainyu (Good Mind) and
Angra Mainyu (Evil Spirit) with their respective angelic and demonic
followers in eternal conflict since the dawn of creation, and so had
many of the now familiar characteristics of older religions. There
were differences of emphasis, of course, and different names for the
gods, but there was plainly something of a common background
between the Judaic and Zoroastrian faiths.
Figure 5. Representations of the Judaic cosmos. Note the great
arch representing upper and lower heavens, the latter
corresponding to the path of the Sun and Moon. The windows in
this path appear to be associated with store-houses for the
winds, upper waters and hail (line drawing reproduced by kind
permission of Weidenfeld & Nicolson).
However, the specific role which the Essenes took upon themselves
was the study of ancient prophecies relating to the immediate future,
which historical evidence had convinced them were the longpredicted Last Times, not only the culmination of world history but
the antecedent of an incipient Golden Age. Thus convinced, they
produced a plan of action, or book of oracles, heavily laden with
astronomical detail, describing:
exactly how and in what order the sect must address itself to
deliberately bringing about the fulfillment of all the outstanding
biblical prophecies. In this way, all the conditions would be
fulfilled for the inauguration of the longawaited kingdom.
Everything therefore hinged upon the prophetic interpretation
of the individual teacher and his successors. With its aid there
now seemed to be every prospect that beleaguered mankind
could at last take the promised kingdom of heaven by storm. 57
As is well known, the belief that Jesus of Nazareth brought this
astronomically oriented programme to fruition was eventually
advanced with considerable success by the Christian sect of the
Essenes. Their argument that this birth and resurrection were
attended by heavenly portents is evidently no without significance,
particularly when one has regard to their special claim that Jesus was
possessed of divine qualities during his sojourn on earth. However
the posthumous failure of the Kingdom of Heaven to arrive was open
to misinterpretation and the later achievements of the Christian sect
owed much of their success to a subsequent reinteipretation of the
original programme by Paul of Tarsus. Taking his inspiration
apparently from a sign, which may be interpreted according to taste
as the occasion of a violent fireball or an epileptic fit, Paul modified
the Christian message along Aristotelian or Hellenic lines by
eliminating the anticipated conflagration and worldend.
Whatever significance we might like to place upon the Pauline
revelation, it is clear that one particular Aristotelian notion, that
meteor and comets were of terrestrial provenance, did not at this
time have general support. There was still a tendency, with which
Christian cosmology now came to be associated, to return these
objects to the celestial sphere. Not as a potential source of
destruction however, as the omen astrologers assumed, but as
purposeful signals from heaven. Paul thereby dissociated the earlier
messianic expectations from a catastrophic world-end and linked
them instead with a spell of suffering by the Son of God, identifies as
Jesus, during a predicted return to Earth. As we have already noted,
it was an old Babylonian idea that kingly suffering was necessary for
the sake of humanity as a whole. Admittedly there were difficulties in
accounting for many of the apocalyptic statements in the sacred
literature but there was usually sufficient ambiguity in a cosmic
messiah ‘who takest the clouds for thy chariot, riding on the wings of
the wind; who makest the winds thy messagers and flames of fire thy
servants’ not to undermine the revisionist thinking.
In this way Paul’s skilful blend of Judaism and Hellenism
successfully overcame the principal failing of Aristotelian theology,
namely its inability to explain the apparently astronomical signs
which were a source of despair to so many. By relating these signs to
the temporary presence of God on Earth, however indispensable
such an idea might appear on other grounds, the basis for confidence
in the future and hope, which already characterized Hellenism to
some degree, was strengthened still further. As a result, Christian
theology came to be seen by managers of State and Academe alike as
providing the soundest possible theoretical basis for natural, civil
and moral law. Through the eventual good offices of the Holy Roman
Empire, associated with divinity through the papal succession, the
Christian sect multiplied and during the first millennium AD became
the dominant force in Near Eastern and European religion.
And so, during a period of reduced meteoric activity in the first few
centuries of the present era, Christian theology began to be licked
into shape. If we examined the acrimonious and frequently violent
conflict that ensued, as different factions struggled for dominance, it
was the question of the divinity of Jesus that naturally emerged as
the most pressing issue. Any deviations from this basic principle,
which might have reduced Jesus to the level of a mere prophet (with
special skills in astrology!) were ruthlessly expunged. The dominance
of the Christian Church indeed came to rest more and more
assertively on the presumed divinity of Jesus and the continuing
association with this divinity through the papal succession. How this
succession was to work was hardly self-evident; but it was a principle
that any government involving an Athenian-styled ‘ecclesia’ needed
to insist on if it was to claim power through the sort of divine or
cosmic association that the Egyptian or Hellenic monarchies had
previously passed on through a dynastic succession. The process now
takes place behind closed doors and seems to be crucially attended
by a puff of smoke!
It is interesting that even this issue may not have been settled
automatically since there is some controversial evidence that the
Holy Roman Empire itself was forged only by absorbing and
suppressing various claimants to a Christian dynastic
succession. 58 Be this as it may, the survival of Christianity could
never be regarded as certain and much of its capacity to survive
through the second millennium AD has depended on the outcome of
several theoretical conflicts during the first millennium AD. For as
Christianity spread into northern Europe, it came increasingly in
contact with various forms of paganism each, as usual, carrying its
own angelology, eschatology and omen astrology developed to
varying levels of sophistication. Maybe these cults would have
capitulated more rapidly to Christianity, as others had done before,
had it not been that the sky degenerated again during the first
millennium AD.
The evidence then is of a Christian Church during the early centuries
AD that increasingly adopted a doctrine of the kind promulgated by
Paul as it moved closer to the sources of political power. However,
the continuing importance of the apocalyptic tradition in early
Christianity, millenarianism as it has come to be called, should not
be underestimated. Thus, apocalyptic ideas did not simply die out;
they persisted, and indeed by the end of the fourth century AD they
reached new levels of intensity throughout the whole underworld of
popular religion. It was largely due to these undercurrents that the
idea of the Saints of the Most High was revitalized to become a new
potent force in Christian circles just as the Patriarchs of old had
among the Jews. Also the idea of divine election re-emerged and
entered the Christian apocalyptic as well. Indeed, the body of
literature inaugurated by the Book of Revelation encouraged many
Christians to see themselves as the Chosen People of the Lord, that
is, chosen both to prepare the way for and to inherit the
millennium. 59
A contemporary expression of these ideas leaves one in little doubt as
to what was envisaged: it was that an Antichrist,
raging with implacable anger, will lead an army and besiege the
mountain where the righteous have taken refuge. And when they
see themselves besieged, they will call loudly to God for help,
and God shall hear them, and shall send them a Liberator. Then
the heavens shall be opened in a tempest, and Christ shall
descend with great power; and a fiery brightness shall go before
him, and a countless host of angels; and all that multitude of the
godless shall be annihilated, and torrents of blood shall flow ...
When peace has been brought about and every evil suppressed,
that righteous and victorious King will carry out a great
judgement on the earth of the living and the dead, and will hand
over all heathen peoples to servitude under the righteous who
are alive, and will raise the (righteous) dead to eternal life, and
will himself reign with them on earth, and will found the Holy
City, and this kingdom of the righteous will last for a thousand
years. Throughout that time, the stars shall be brighter, and the
brightness of the sun shall be increased, and the moon shall not
wane. Then the rain of blessing shall descend from God morning
and evening, and the earth shall bear all fruits without man’s
labour. Honey in abundance shall drip from the rocks, fountains
of milk and wine shall burst forth. The beasts of the forest shall
put away their wildness ... [and so on].
There are fanciful elements, of course, in this millennial vision, but
one is bound to wonder whether some underlying cosmic spectacle
was causing it. As Cohn points out, the forthcoming millennium was
so widely attractive ‘that no official condemnation could prevent it
occurring again and again to the minds of the under-privileged and
oppressed’, and the institutionalized Church needed to display ‘the
utmost skill in controlling and canalizing the emotional energies of
the faithful, particularly in directing hopes and fears away from this
life towards the next’.
Augustine in particular, during the fifth century, was to propound a
view of the millennium which later became official doctrine. In his
City of God, he argued that the Book of Revelation could be
understood as spiritual allegory whilst the millennium had already
arrived with the birth of Christianity and was indeed realized in the
existence of the Church. 60 He also presented the Church as a
defender of ancient tradition and as the sole dispenser of divine
essence (grace), thereby guaranteeing a formal role for the Church
hierarchy and its establishment, both maintaining an essential
cosmic connection and justifying the extension of its mission by
increasing the ‘card-carrying membership’. Nevertheless the fourth
and fifth centuries remained a period of deep schism within the
Church, revived paganism outside and intensified monastic
withdrawal. The evidence points all too clearly to human conduct as
a matter for general concern, driven it would appear, by a growing
fear that the heavens would indeed open up in a tempest. Inevitably
the rule of the establishment was either blamed or condoned,
abandoned or enforced, but the social fabric was torn apart all the
same: an age of massive migration ensued and a more or less total
lapse of central control. Barbarian incursions grew relentlessly,
slowly but surely sapping the strength of the Roman Empire until in
410 AD, Rome itself was to fall ignominiously to the Visigoths under
Alaric. By this time however, Europe was on the brink of another
Dark Age.
One of the most extraordinary documents of the Dark Age, written
some 130 years after the sack of Rome and the collapse of Roman
rule in Britain, is a tract due to the British priest Gildas. Entitled ‘De
excidio et conquest Britanniae’, it describes in broad historical
outline the course of events leading to what is called ‘the ruin of
Britain’. The tract is not primarily a historical document however
since Gildas’s main purpose was clearly to admonish his
contemporaries for standards of behavior that left much to be
desired, using recent past events to illustrate the likely course of
heavenly retribution to come. Indeed, as we shall see, the
contemporary period was one of strongly recurring meteor activity
while Gildas, greatly respected in his own time as a sage and by
historians such as Bede in centuries that followed, is now usually
regarded as the only contemporary writer who attempted, however
inadequately, a general survey of British history from the latter days
of Roman rule until the middle of the sixth century AD. 61
Remarkably, Gildas shows little interest in any part played by
AngloSaxons in the early stages of the collapse of Roman and subRoman authority, and indeed, when Saxons appear, it is not as
devastating raiders and invaders of Lowland Britain but as federate
allies settled there by the leader Vortigern to help defend the land
against incursions from the Piets and Scots. Furthermore, following
the changes in official doctrine introduced by Augustine, the Roman
Church was obliged to take very seriously certain heretical
tendencies in Britain, and we know from accounts of the visit to
Britain in the period before 440 AD by Germanus, the bishop of
Auxerre, to discuss these problems, that subRoman Britain was still a
force to be reckoned with and that Vortigern was in charge of a fairly
well-ordered regime. Soon afterwards, however, it is clear that this
regime suffered a quite exceptional reverse, the disaster being felt the
length and breadth of the land. The outburst, which was ‘the ruin of
Britain’, was marked apparently by widespread slaughter and
destruction. In this episode, whose duration is not specified, Gildas
deplores in particular the physical overthrow and ruin of towns, and
the massacre of Christian clergy, both decisive in bringing about a
virtually total liquidation of the most characteristic features of late
Roman urban civilization.
The problem for historians is 61 that Gildas writes of all this in
melodramatic phraselogy ‘employed deliberately’, it is said, ‘to create
the maximum impression’; yet it is also clearly recognized that
Gildas must here be treated as a witness of truth, for ‘it would have
been fatal to his argument and the aims of his tract to have described
in such terms a situation which his readers knew to have been quite
different’. Gildas reports on the events leading up to the catastrophe
of the ‘feathered flight of not unfamiliar rumour’ (the rumble of
incoming meteors, one wonders, reduced to subsonic speed), and of
the catastrophe itself that it was due to:
the fire of righteous vengeance, kindled by the sins of the past,
[which] blazed from sea to sea, its fuel prepared by the arms of
the impious from the east. Once lit it did not die down. When it
had wasted town and country in that area, it burnt out almost
the hole surface of the island, until its red and savage tongue
licked the western ocean ... All the greater towns fell to the
enemy’s battering rams; all their inhabitants, bishops, priests
and people, were mowed down together, while swords flashed
and flames crackled. Horrible it was to see the foundation stones
of towers and high walls thrown down bottom upwards in the
squares, mixing with holy altars and fragments of human bodies
... there was no burial save in the ruins of the houses, or in the
bellies of the beasts and the birds.
The rhetoric, for such it is commonly deemed to be, leaves little to
the imagination. On the other hand, the destruction in the towns, of
which Gildas speaks, was still evident a century later; there was a
desperate call to Aetius, the Roman leader in Gaul, for help; there
does appear to have been an official delegation to Britain soon after,
led once again by Germanus; and, subsequently, an exodus across
the Channel on such a scale as to justify the future name of Brittany.
The population of Britain did indeed plunge and the archaeological
record is one of extreme deprivation and bare subsistence living for a
generation or more thereafter. The scale of the disaster is not really
in doubt, therefore; and as Myres has pointed out, the evidence in
the future spoken language and in place-names over a substantial
chunk of Britain, extending from the Midlands to East Anglia,
demonstrates that the previous Roman and sub-Roman civilization
was completely wiped out. The evidence in the soil, moreover, is of a
still heavily wooded countryside before this period which seems to
have experienced drastic deforestation over a fairly short interval of
time. Such evidence is not inconsistent with the picture of sudden
and widespread conflagration described by Gildas.
There is further physical and documentary evidence, also, of a sharp
deterioration in global climate in the aftermath of these events. The
northern treeline in Canada and Scandinavia receded by a hundred
miles or so (figure 2), whilst the Annales Cambriae speaks of days as
dark as night in AD 444 or AD 447, consistent also with Gildas’s
reported failure in the production of wine. In the history of Northern
Britain, too, recounted much later by Nennius, there is mention that
Germanus made another visit after the disaster, but there are curious
and unexplained references to the destruction of Vortigem’s fortress
‘by fire sent from heaven [as] the fire of heaven burned’.
Other literary sources of less certain pedigree speak of Vortigern,
who had previously consulted his magi (astronomers) and
withdrawn to his fortress, actually perishing during this incident. We
would not then expect the official delegation from Gaul to have any
subsequent contact with Vortigern and indeed it is reported that
Germanus was received by a certain Elaphius who was said to be ‘the
first man of the district’. The latter, in view of the destruction of
central authority in the land and of the destitute state of the
population and countryside, might well under these circumstances
have been persuaded as to the merits of a mass exodus across the
Channel to relieve the immediate hardship in Britain whilst also
providing much needed reinforcement for Roman Gaul against the
recurring threats from Visigoths and Huns. But as the exodus went
ahead, it seems that the former allies and mercenaries of AngloSaxon
origin were reappearing in Britain to claim settlements rights that
were said to have been agreed previously with Vortigern. Such hints
as there may be in this course of events of a heaven-sent force which
effectively ruined Britain, argue in favour of a celestial rather than an
Anglo-Saxon agency for ‘the fire of righteous vengeance’ cited by
Gildas. Indeed the ‘battering rams’ which he also cited, in their Latin
equivalent, are ‘aries’, a term with obvious connotations relating to
stars as much as sheep (see also chapter 1), even to the extent of a
specific association with the largest known cosmic swarm (chapter
10). Commentators in China and Spain, it is worth noting, also
record an unusual observation of a ‘strange comet’ in 441 AD.
Subsequent reports on the continent of a sequence of events leading
to a disaster in Britain before 442 are in fact now seen as making
quite exaggerated claims for successful invasion by the Anglo-Saxons
at this time. However they may justifiably be seen as evidence that
piratical opportunists were seeking to establish footholds in Britain.
Thus, although the Anglo-Saxon dominance of Britain from this time
was once accepted as fact, the evidence can now be understood as
pointing to a cosmic catastrophe unrelated to continental invaders
and subsequently, during the latter half of the fifth century and the
first half of the sixth, of a Celtic Britain which was restored to
something of its former strength by members of the nobility,
returned from Gaul (cf. Table 2).
Indeed the main Anglo-Saxon invasion taking over Britain is now
seen as having occurred at least a century later than the catastrophe,
at a time which corresponds to the earliest known returns, according
to the calculations of the German astronomer Klinkerfues, 62 of
intense meteor showers due to Comet Biela (chapter 9). The
tendency in Britain five centuries later, when Anglo-Saxon overlords
were replaced by a new generation of nobles from northern Gaul, to
hanker after glorious A it hu rain age in which an ancient celestial
figure in the form of Merlin also commanded great respect, does then
become more comprehensible as evidence of a presumed, also
greatly feared, celestial influence during the Dark Age.63 Indeed a
Dark Age whose aspiring kings were much given to heading their
genealogies with celestial gods, in general accordance with a still
widely accepted principle of divine election (cf. plate 18), is likewise
the more comprehensible. It is an interesting question, in fact,
whether the whole of the first millennium AD should be understood
in terms of a crusading ethic amongst the divinely elected, inspired
by celestial events, first settings Anglo-Saxons inter alia on the
move, only to be replaced by the Vikings in due course.
Later, the exploits of the Vikings were on a grandiose scale,
embracing the whole of Europe. 64 But they grew out of a Dark Age
already centuries long and our knowledge of their origins is very
sparse. The best documented of the Viking raids, and also the earliest
recorded in the west, is the plundering and destruction in 793 of the
church and monastery on the tiny defenceless island of Lindisfarne.
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle states that terrifying omens — lightning
and flying dragons — which were witnessed that year were followed
by famine, and that shortly after these dolorous events, in June,
heathens fell upon the island community and pillaged God’s house
there. During the restorations of the twelfth-century priory on
Lindisfarne, archeologists found a curious carved stone apparently
dating from soon after the assault on the earlier monastery and
illustrating the dreadful event. On one side of the stone were carved
the various cosmic symbols, the Cross, the Sun and the Moon, God’s
hands, and worshippers at prayer. On the other side the attackers are
seen, swinging their swords and battleaxes as they advance in single
file, dressed outlandishly in thick jerkins and narrow trousers:
invaders perhaps who were preceded by ‘the full flame’? The Vikings
consciously saw themselves apparently as marauders who pounced
from concealed positions, as if from creeks or caves, supposing the
etymology of the word is understood, but to Spaniards they were
‘heathen wizards’, to Germans they were ‘ashmen’. There are strange
associations here that have not been explained. Historians indeed
have not even remarked on the dramatic increase in the flux of
meteor storms and fireballs during this period, although we have
good records of events in the sky from the Chinese astrologers.
This renewed activity in the sky evidently reached its maximum
during the eleventh century AD, the peak coinciding, by chance, with
the conspicuous reappearance of a bright comet in 1066 (see plate 9).
Inevitably, warrior kings, builders of vast keeps in the style of an
earlier Mycenean age, would relate their rise to power to such signs
from heaven whilst the Christian Church would draw upon the
resources of the people in raising huge cathedrals and other places of
worship, still modeled paradoxically on the pagan cosmos, in
preparation for the ‘millennium’.
At this time too, it is reported quite specifically by nearcontemporary
historians in the ‘Recueil des historiens des Croisades’ that Pope
Urban 11 convened the Council of Clermont in November 1095 for
the purposes of authorizing the First Crusade, with all the
farreaching consequences that it set in train, immediately following a
violent meteor storm: 65
In the time of the emperor Henry IV ... according to the prophecies
in the Gospels, everywhere nation arose against nation and kingdom
against kingdom; and there were great earthquakes in divers places,
and pestilences and famines and terrors from heaven and great
signs. And because already in all nations the The resilience of
crusading Christian theology was thus once again tested, and seemed
to ride high on the renewed fears of Doomsday and worldend. 66 Indeed, during the centuries that followed this meteoric
spasm, the Christian Church maintained its power, but as the sky
ceased once again to be important, the Church moved to embrace
Aristotelian principles rather more readily than the feudal warlords
who presumably still depended on signs from heaven to underpin
their kingships and influence. Thus in the wake of the Arthurian age
and the decline of Merlin, for such the millennial meteoric spasm
appears to have been, the Christian Church centred on Rome enjoyed
its period of maximum influence. But in due course, yet again, in the
fourteenth century, strange portents in the sky (chapter 1) and an
inclement climate seem to have re-emerged to add to the plight of
mortals on earth. It is no surprise that, in the respite that
followed — the European Renaissance so-called — the authority of
the Church and the fundamental nature of the cosmos should once
again be questioned.
Plate 9. Perspective on Halley’s Comet, (a) As represented on the
Bayeux tapestry, during its 1066 apparition (Tapisseric de
Bayeux et avec autorisation special de la Ville de Bayeux). (b)
Crowned with great horns? As photographed from Mt Wilson
Observatory during its 1910 apparition, (c) The nucleus during
its 1986 apparition, photographed by the European Giotto
spacecraft (by kind permission of Dr H. U. Keller, Max Planck
Institut fur Aeronomie, Lindau/Harz, FRG. CD MPAE, 1986).
The nucleus is an extremely black, rotating object with
dimensions about 16 X 10X9 kilometres. The tail of the comet is
made up of gas and dust ejected in jets from a few active areas
on the surface of the nucleus. During a close encounter with a
brilliant comet, individual jets would be seen, creating a spiral
or possibly even a swastika in the sky (cf. plate 19). [Thus] when
it was God’s will and pleasure to free the Holy Sepulchre [at
Jerusalem], in which his son had lain for the sins of men, from
the power of the evangelical trumpet was sounding the coming
of the Last Judge, the universal Church beheld throughout the
whole world the portents in prophetic signs ... pagans and to
open the way to Christians desiring to travel there for the
redemption of their souls, he showed many signs, powers,
prodigies and portents to sharpen the minds of Christians so
that they should want to hurry there. For the stars in the sky
were seen throughout the whole world to fall towards the earth,
crowded together and dense, like hail, or snowflakes. A short
while later a fiery way appeared in the heavens; and then after
another short period half the sky turned the colour of blood.
8 — Felony Compounded
The road from Ptolemy to Copernicus was thirteen hundred years
long, and in all that time scarcely a new idea found its way into
astronomy. The Academy at Athens was closed whilst that at
Alexandria was stultified by ideology, the Great Library eventually
being burned to the ground, either by Christian fanatics or Arab
conquerors. The goal of unifying physics and astronomy, already
something of a charade in Ptolemy’s time, had become a remote
prospect. However, following centuries of which it could be said ‘All
curiosity is at an end after Jesus, all research after the Gospel. Let us
have Faith, and wish for nothing more’, the opportunity to rethink
seems again to have been at hand.
Remnants of Greek science eventually found their way to the new
medieval universities of Europe by way of the Arab kingdoms of
Spain and Sicily (plate 10), and something of the way in which the
Greeks first came to study the planets seems to have been
reconstructed. More significantly perhaps, through institutions
provided by the medieval Church, a tradition of scholarly teaching
and study came to be revived. By the middle of the thirteenth
century, indeed, Thomas Aquinas was arranging that the Aristotelian
system was once again theoretically wedded to Christian theology, so
ensuring that any future reconstruction of physics outside
Aristotelian or Ptolemaic lines would not be a task for the fainthearted.
Despite this, there were aspects of Aristotelian cosmology that
continued to worry the purists; particularly the central position of
the Earth and the location and status of comets. For example in the
fifteenth century the German cardinal Nicolas of Cusa, in his treatise
On Learned Ignorance, disputed the Aristotelian idea that space
could be bounded by an outermost sphere; and if there was no
boundary to space, how could there be a centre? Earth, Sun or Moon
could be imagined at the centre of the universe arbitrary. And if the
universe had no centre to which motions could be referred, why
should the Earth not be considered in motion?
Plate 10. A Muslim astronomer observing a comet with a
quadrant (Topkapi Sarayi Museum Library).
Such questions had not been properly settled and around the middle
of the second millennium AD, Copernicus (1473-1543) indicated that
perhaps the Sun should be placed in the middle. The concept of a
central Sun should be placed in the middle. The concept of a central
Sun was at first deflected by the Church: thus an arrangement by one
Osiander ensured that Copernicus’ work was prefaced with an
unsigned disclaimer stating that the new idea was merely a
mathematical device for the purposes of easy computation, and not
the physical truth. The Church, Roman and Protestant, had little
difficulty therefore in suppressing this new idea and later attempts to
revive it led to Bruno (1548-1600), in the hands of the Inquisition,
being burned at the stake and Galileo (1564-1642) being placed
under house-arrest. However, within a century of the death of
Copernicus, the simplicity of the new system as against the
complexity of the old was beginning to tell. 67
It was the careful observations of the Danish astronomer Tycho
Brahe which eventually rendered necessary a radical change. The
ground had been prepared by the appearance, in 1572, of a brilliant
star in the sky (known now to have been a supernova), which was
hard to reconcile with the perfect, unchanging sky of Aristotle. A
great comet then appeared in 1577 and Tycho, by careful
observations, was able to show that even at its nearest approach to
Earth, the comet was still well beyond the Moon, contrary to the
Aristotelian view that comets were mere atmospheric phenomena. It
was still conceivable, of course, that comets were indicators of divine
intention, and indeed the appearance of this comet unleashed much
sermonizing and writing of blood-curdling tracts, but those of the
time who were less eshatologically inclined were now able to take a
more prosaic view. 68 Kepler, for example, simply assumed comets
were sweeping past the Solar System in straight lines while Galileo
treated them as mere optical illusions!
The latter was not a particularly tenable point of view on any account
and we find Newton (1642-1726), somewhat later, preferring the
Keplerian assumption: not out of conservatism, as it happens, but
because he wished to avoid comet encounters doing any damage to
the Solar System as he perceived it. Thus Newton (plate 11), like
Aristotle before him, considered the Solar System to be a divine
creation, set to run like a clockwork machine; and stray comets
passing through obviously put the system very much at risk. 69
Plate 11. Sir Isaac Newton (Mansell Collection
In 1680, however, another important comet was observed. Its path
across the sky was accurately tracked by the Astronomer Royal,
Flamsteed, at Greenwich. The orbit of this comet was shown to be,
not a straight line, but a parabola coming within the planetary
system. It says something for Newton’s understanding of gravity at
this stage that he did not treat the parabola as an illustration of his
gravitational law. In fact, he at first refused to believe Flamsteed’s
observation and only later came to regard the orbits of comets as
another aspect of the divinely ordained law of gravity, and the latter
as universal. But with a subtle change of emphasis, Newton now
insisted that encounters of comets with planets should be seen as
providential rather than catastrophic events, the means whereby the
planets were occasionally revitalized. Very little attention has been
paid to this interesting circumvention of Newton’s but its impact on
science has in some respects been almost as significant as that of his
law of gravity. Let us follow the matter a little further.
Newton was, of course, not alone in reflecting on these questions and
by this time the possibility of a disaster through cometary impact on
the Earth had become a matter for general debate. That the Earth’s
axis had shifted in the past due to the close approach of a comet was
accepted as a serious proposition. A future encounter, it was thought,
might bring the world to an end through overheating it. Scholars
seriously discussed whether the conflagration of Phaethon and the
flood of Duecalion or Ogyges had been caused by a celestial body.
The flood of Ogyges was noted for example as having been attributed
to the arrival of a comet Typhon, and there was also a Biblical
connection for Roman historians had declared the plagues of Egypt
to be a contemporary event. Such issues as whether the floods of
Noah. Ogyges and Deucalion were one and the same were also
raised, and the outcome of all these enquiries was a growing interest
in terrestrial catastrophism and ancient chronology. On the one
hand, it seemed that historical studies might help to determine the
periods of recurring comets, and on the other, it seemed that
periodic returns might be used as a celestial clock to plot the course
of major historical events, the epochs for example of Abraham,
Moses and Christ.
Then, by chance, another comet appeared in 1682. Halley was one of
the first to note that its orbit was that of the comets of 1531 and 1607:
a celestial clock had been found. This particular comet was to take
Halley’s name in due course (following its predicted return in 1758)
but Halley’s more immediate interest was in deriving a period for the
1680 comet. A value of 575 years was obtained, incorrect as it
happens, which William Whiston (Newton’s successor in the chair of
mathematics at Cambridge) made use of in calculating earlier
apparitions. This quite fictitious orbital period had the comet
returning at the time of Caesar’s death in 44 BC, and an earlier
return was supposed also to coincide with Noah’s flood in 2342 BC.
Whiston’s book describing these researches, dedicated to Newton,
rapidly came to be seen by clerics and nature philosophers alike as a
major step forward in the advancement of knowledge. Seemingly for
the first time, observational science and received Biblical knowledge
were in excellent accord. It was a history of catastrophe moreover,
and the day of judgement could even be at hand.
Whiston did not rest on his laurels, however. He thought the course
of events simply requited a more matter-of-fact interpretation of the
Bible, and he tended to play down the role played by Christ. Thus,
although Jesus’s standing as a prophet could be secure, his divine
attributes seemed again open to question. This was too much for
most of Whiston’s contemporaries, who saw this as an attempted
revival of the heretical doctrine known as Arianism, and the clerical
establishment soon sought to distance itself from Whiston. In the
meantime Newton, boxed in by these new implications of comets,
took it upon himself to emphasize again what he now claimed to be
the fundamental role of comets, namely their ability to deposit new
material on the stars and planets and their potential for doing good
to the Earth. The calm voice of reason was speaking. Scaremongering
was naturally added to the list of Whiston’s faults and it was not long
before he was dismissed from his post. The message was clear: the
Earth was not to be disturbed.
There is evidence that Newton was in fact well aware of the
catastrophic potential of comet impacts. These did not, however, fit
easily into his clockwork, predetermined universe, and he never
publicly raised the issue. Whether we should accuse Newton of
dissembling over the issue is perhaps uncertain but there is no
question that many who followed Newton, in England especially,
were soon eagerly endorsing the harmless role of comets, now that
they were seen to obey mechanical laws and could no longer be
regarded as signs from Heaven.
The return of Halley’s Comet in due course, in accord with
gravitational law, merely served to reinforce the new paradigm — as
also did Lexell’s comet years later. This comet passed the Earth
without exerting any noticeable change on the planet’s orbit. This
was good evidence that comets were very much smaller than planets,
thereby diminishing still further any lingering concern over their
menace. By the end of the eighteenth century, then, Newton’s public
view of comets had gained considerably in strength and we find
William Herschel, George III’s astronomer, putting forward the
opinion that comets were to be taken as interstellar objects purposely
weaving their way among the stars including the Sun. with the
specific intention of replenishing their fuel, and if necessary,
planetary life as well. Newton’s theory had therefore developed
rather successfully into an all-embracing cosmological view of some
permanence and continuity.
The new discoveries of meteorites and asteroids at the beginning of
the nineteenth century might have disturbed the status quo by
raising the spectre of celestial hazard. In the early decades of the
nineteenth century also, Comet Biela was seen to break up and
intense meteor showers appeared in 1832 and 1833. The latter
shower, seen in North America, led to surprise, panic, terror and a
widespread belief that the Day of Judgement was near. 70 There was
at this time also a revival of catastrophist views especially among
scientists of the French Academy.
However, the revival was short-lived. The generally small sizes of the
meteorites and the apparent confinement of the asteroids to a belt
between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter must have allayed any fears.
Further, by the middle of the nineteenth century, there was a
growing realization that many comets in short-period orbits rapidly
decayed under the influence of heat from the Sun into harmless
streams of dust. Indeed it seemed that Nature was able to cooperate
with Man by turning comets into dust which fed into the atmosphere
to be witnessed always as shooting stars. Comets were thus harmless
again and there was even a growing appreciation that they were
probably not interstellar, as Herschel had supposed, but had always
belonged to the Solar System.
The Universe was thus beginning to seem again a rather cosy affair,
the Sun pre-eminent in space and the Earth on a sort of eternal
merrygo-round, with the good fortune to be entertained from time to
time by firework displays against the background of more permanent
stars. By the middle of the last century, therefore, Newton’s longestablished theory of comets appeared to have been vindicated:
celestial portents had been well and truly tamed, and the benevolent
cosmos of Aristotle and Paul had been reconstructed.
Within about a hundred years of the period which we now call the
Enlightenment, a situation had emerged in which simple
mathematical laws (those of motion and gravity) appeared to govern
absolutely the forces of Nature. Such a situation was unprecedented
and was the basis of the singular confidence of nineteenth-century
physical scientists and Victorian society generally. Admittedly, if one
were to examine the details, there were difficulties with the
mechanical aether which was supposed to transmit waves of light as
well as the forces of gravity, but the solution of these particular
difficulties was widely assumed to be just a matter of patience and
time. The mechanisms involved were, it was thought, likely to be
simple and could fall easily into place once there was a proper grasp
of all the experimental phenomena. With our knowledge today of all
the surprises yet in store and of all the great upheavals in physics
that were to come, 71 it is difficult perhaps to grasp the real feeling of
mastery over the forces of Nature that prevailed in the nineteenth
century. This feeling also extended to the astronomical environment
in view of the latter’s presumed harmless character arising from
Newton’s theories. Thus, while gravity could be seen to pervade the
universe and provide a smooth undercurrent of physical control over
the behavior of matter, it was also possible so far as comets were
concerned to draw a clear demarcation between the unharmed Earth
on the one hand and the non-interventionist cosmos on the other.
The impact of this revitalized Aristotelian arrangement was far
greater than is often realized these days; for never before had there
been created such an impression of security in relation to the
astronomical surroundings. The new benevolent cosmos
underwritten by Newtonian laws could even now be interpreted as
the ultimate triumph of a tranquil Christian tradition over fiercer
Judaic ones and those of presumed lessenlightened faiths.
There are tempting parallels here between the British Empire at its
zenith and its Hellenic predecessor. In both cases the world was, in
some sense, under control. Certainly Victorian society had its
chartist movement, an unpopular monarchy, great inequality of
wealth and so on, whilst the Hellenic kingdoms were frequently at
war with each other; nevertheless in both cases a sense of confident
control over destiny seems to have pervaded these societies. And in
both cases the universe was understood as a more or less noninterventionist backdrop to the affairs of the Earth. It may be no
accident that, like its Hellenic predecessor, an empire at its zenith
should have provided the setting within which the universe was to be
so understood, and no suiprise that earth scientists and biologists
now felt free to explain terrestrial and biological evolution
unhindered by any thought of external interference.
In like manner, historians and sociologists began to look to purely
human factors dominating the course of historical events. The belief
can also be found in classical times, being held for example by the
ancient historian Thucydides. But now a sharp division of interest
emerged between those who explored the human one, the latter
secure in the knowledge that, apparently, any external influence had
finally been removed. This division into ‘two cultures’ evidently has
no valid foundation and there is some awareness that it causes
substantial damage in the educational and economic spheres at least.
What is not understood is that in addition, by supposing the affairs
of Earth to take place in splendid isolation, in an irrelevant cosmos,
the massive hazards which mankind may face from the astronomical
environment have in effect been programmed out of public
consciousness.
Of course, this argument is a gross simplification and a partial
caricature, but it is possible to wonder nevertheless whether our
distorted view of history today has not unleashed on western
civilization such a sense of superiority that we spurn the sky and put
our future in peril. Certainly we cannot escape the fact that the loss
of a cosmic perspective arising out of Newton’s fundamental thinking
has now penetrated more or less every branch of learning to the
extent that it goes largely unrecognized. For example, there is a
widespread and mistaken view nowadays, especially among earth
scientists and Biblical fundamentalists, that the issue of
catastrophism in Earth history was decided at this epoch, the middle
of the nineteenth century, by geologists and biologists debating the
forces of natural selection and the nature of geological change. In
fact, the uniformitarian framework had already been agreed by
astronomers, as we have seen, and it had simply become a matter of
convincing oneself that contemporary terrestrial processes were
enough to explain evolutionary change, as revealed for example by
the fossil record. Admittedly catastrophists like Buckland and Cuvier
opposed the trend but the debate was short-lived. As it happens, the
geologist Lyell and the natural historian Darwin, and their followers,
took the lead over this issue because they were not particularly
bound by any Biblical or physical conventions regarding the age of
the Earth; but insofar as they needed support for the slow action of
virtually undetectable forces, the physical scene had already been set.
Over the century or so following the publication of Darwin’s theory of
evolution, catastrophism lost all respectability. From time to time,
attempts were made to revive what might be called ‘Biblical’
catastrophism, the idea that astronomical disasters have occurred on
Earth in historical times. One such attempt was published in 1823 by
the German linguist Radlof (plate 12). This was 127 years after
Whiston’s New Theory of the Earth, and 36 years before Darwin’s
Origin of Species. At the time Radlof wrote, only four asteroids had
been discovered in the large gap between the orbits of Mars and
Jupiter, but it was widely thought that they were the remnants of a
planet which had exploded and that numerous fragments would
eventually be found. Radlof developed a hypothesis which was both
consistent with the scientific knowledge of the day and also seemed
to account for the ancient tales of catastrophe. According to him, a
large planet in orbit between Mars and Jupiter was shattered by
collision with a comet. One fragment, Phaethon, struck the Earth,
giving rise to tales of celestial battle in which the monster Typhoeus
was hurled to Earth. Another fragment became the planet Venus,
undergoing close encounters with Mars on its way in to its present
orbit.
Sixty years later, world end traditions were again similarly
interpreted by the Irish American politician Donnelly. His book
Ragnarok: the Age of Fire and Gravel , published in 1883, created a
considerable stir when it came out. In it, Donnely argued that the
Earth had had a close encounter with a comet, which had left its
mark in the form of extensive gravel and till deposits in America and
Europe.
The most famous (or notorious) of the ‘Biblical’ catastrophists, again
in America, was Velikovsky, the author of Worlds in Collision, who in
1950, from his studies of ancient tales, revived the old notion that a
comet had shifted the Earth’s axis, and even resurrected Radlof s
notion that the planet Venus had hurtled past the Earth around 1500
BC, flinging Mars around in the process. There were differences of
detail: whereas Radolf had Venus as a planetary fragment flung out
of the asteroid belt, Velikovsky had it thrown out of Jupiter. Time,
however, had marched on: what was perhaps seen as tenable in 1823
was now patently absurd in 1950. The decline of catastrophism, as a
serious proposition, was complete.
Plate 12. Frontispiece of Radlof’s book, published in 1823.
Hesperus and Phaethon, in which historical catastrophes were
related to the fragmentation of an asteroid (by kind permission
of the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh).
It is interesting to note that the Biblical catastrophists were all
‘outsiders’ of one sort or another. Radlof was at first regarded by his
contemporaries as a brilliant linguist, but as his ideas departed more
and more from the mainstream so he became more and more
isolated, and he died in obscurity, even the date of his death being
unknown. Donnelly was regarded as a talented orator and statesman,
but he seemed unable to toe any party line for long and his
increasingly maverick opinions ensured that his political career was
ultimately a failure. Velikovsky was a psychiatrist who had studied
under Freud, but whose incursion into the domain of astronomers
was to prove an intellectual disaster.
What is significant in the Velikovsky affair is not so much his
scientific proposition, which is an easy target, as the vitriolic reaction
of the American astronomical community to it. Little attempt was
made by the critics to evaluate the historical information; that there
might be more things in heaven and earth than was apparent in the
astronomy of 1950, that Velikovsky and his predecessors might
however dimly have been detecting the signal of real events in the
noise of ancient myths, does not seem to have occurred to them:
celestial portents had been more than just tamed, they had become
unthinkable.
We have now traced the labyrinthine story of mankind’s reactions to
the events in the sky. We have seen how preoccupation with the sky,
and fear of it, was an integral part of the earliest civilizations. There
was a clear perception that catastrophe might from time to time be
visited on the Earth from above. But as the gods faded from the
zodiac there was, inevitably, a shift of perception. A downgrading of
comets as celestial portents was both politically opportune, and
philosophically necessary if the theory of a perfect sky was to hold.
Of course, the linkages between religion, government and philosophy
are part of the complex stuff of history, and our working out of the
above view in earlier chapters is inevitably simplistic. But if there is a
kernel of truth in the proposition that environments
interact — natural, intellectual and political — then it cannot be
avoided that exciting performances from the sky, occasionally
associated with something like a nuclear impact, will generate a
particular view of the world, and that the decay of these
performances will leave that world-view high and dry. Likewise, if
there is a kernel of truth in the proposition that meteors were once
frequently recognized demons, with a not wholly unpredictable role
to play in the incidence of weather and disease as well as in the
survival of ‘chosen people’, then, nor can it be avoided that a
particular, seemingly plausible, view of the world will in due course
be seen as dealing only in natural magic and occult virtues. The
surprise, of course, is that there may be more realism in the hidden
forces of medieval magic than there may be in some of the physical
concepts now advanced within a modern scientific rationale.
We have seen how an ancient belief in swarms of wandering bodies
that would sometimes emerge to strike the Earth gave way in postAristotelian times to the nonsensical idea that planetary
conjunctions were of significance for life on Earth. Modern
newspapers, presumably guided by editors with a preponderantly
classical education, sublimely unaware of both earlier and later
developments, still persist in presenting this perverse from of
astrology, involving horoscopes, to the twentieth-century public. We
have seen how in the eyes of Christian apologists determined to root
out apocalypse, comets ceased to be material objects and became
celestial signs free for the expert to interpret. Several times over the
last two millennia, phenomena from the sky were seen to threaten
world-end: once at the beginning of the present era (2000 BC-AD
100), again during the first millennium (AD 350-450, AD 550-650,
AD 800-1100) and then again, albeit less impressively, perhaps three
times during the present one (around AD 1350-1450, AD 1650 and
the early decades of the last century). Several times, the apparent
threat lingered for centuries, paradoxically adding weight to the
Christian myth. Then, towards the end of the medieval period, as the
Christian logic appeared to falter, there was an opportunity to
reassess the question of the interaction between the Earth and its
environment. But the Christian grip was strong and Newton, like
Aristotle, had his subtle vision of perfection which carried great
influence. He claimed not to ‘deal in conjecture’; and the way
forward, perceived as such to the present day, was to build on the
secure mathematical foundation of his laws. We have seen how his
revelations of cosmic security and cosmic law were to be the lynchpins around which twentieth-century science revolved.
But now, the space age has arrived, riding on scientific laws, and the
importance of past impact cratering on planetary surfaces has been
recognized. The extent of the asteroidal population is also now being
revealed. These and other discoveries are now being put together as
cause and effect. Most the evidence, as we shall see, indicates that
asteroids are probably defunct cometary material and that their
supply into the central region of the Solar System is maintained by
the intermittent flux of giant comets from a comet cloud surrounding
the planetary system. 72 The implication is that swarms of asteroids
periodically exist in Earth-crossing orbits and that these are
responsible for producing an erratic sequence of cosmic winters
sudden coolings of the globe.
There have in fact probably been at least two successful and several
more aborted cosmic winters during the last five thousand years. The
strength and epoch of the next such global cooling cannot be
calculated at the moment because the celestial body or bodies likely
to cause it has (or have) not yet been detected by astronomers. In
fact there is little interest in a search, although the effects of such an
encounter may be broadly as horrific as those of a nuclear war. As
always, the unthinkable becomes the excuse for not looking.
Some lemmings, a story has it, rush over cliffs. Others, with the
successful breeding of two thousand years, just sit on a globe and
wait.
II — THE BULL OF HEAVEN
9 — Celestial Mechanics
To the casual observer on a clear dark night, away from city lights,
the stars appear as points of light on a huge dark dome. Stretching
across this celestial vault, there is a broad, irregular band of light
known as the Milky Way, a river or path over which, in earliest times,
were said to have trodden ghosts, pilgrims, souls and many other
creatures of the mind. Binoculars reveal the Milky Way to be made
up of myriads of stars. The Sun is one such star and it would only
have to be moved ten or twenty light years away to be completely lost
appearances, the latter is a mighty disc some 100,000 light years
average just a few light years apart. The whole system is now known
as the Galaxy and it happens that the Sun is immersed within it close
to the central plane and some 25 light millennia from its central
nucleus.
To get a better idea of what these huge distances mean, we can scale
down the dimensions of the galactic disc to those of a large city such
as Greater London; its thickness is then about 200 metres and the
average distance between stars is about a foot. On this scale, the
planetary system is only about a third of a millimeter across; and we
can readily see that the Galaxy is largely empty space. If the age of
the Galaxy, which is about ten thousand million years, is similarly
compressed into one year, the Sun and its planets are less than 5
months old whilst the dramas of the present ice age have been acted
out only during the last 15 seconds of the year. To some degree then,
our environment is simply a matter of perspective: the astronomer
tends to see the Earth as a tiny vulnerable speck drifting with the Sun
in a huge galactic wilderness; the geologist tends to see it as a
massive self-contained globe evolving under the influence of strong
internal forces; whilst the historian tends to see it as an inert
platform, without relevance to the performances that are staged on
it.
The vast astronomical distances tend to give one a misleading
impression of the activity in the Universe however. The stars and
planets are in fact in a continual state of motion under the influence
of gravitational fields but in the case of stars, the distances are so
great that very little is perceptible to the naked eye. Planets on the
other hand are much closer and appear correspondingly more active,
their orbital periods being measured in years. Now, a planet orbiting
their orbital periods being measured in years. Now, a planet orbiting
a solitary Sun would continue in an unchanging elliptical orbit
forever. It is not so obvious however whether this simple state of
affairs would continue in the real world. Thus, while planets disturb
each other through their mutual gravitational attractions, and there
are small deviations from perfect ellipticity, the cumulative effect of
these changes is known to be extremely small over periods of several
million years, so the stability of the Solar System planets is
mathematically assured over these timescales. Beyond that, opinion
about the stability of planetary orbits is based on physical rather
than mathematical insight. For example it has been
calculated 73 that, if the Earth were to move closer to the Sun by
about 5 per cent, a ‘runaway greenhouse’ effect would set in,
generating an unstable rise in the Earth’s temperature to the extent
that the oceans would boil. On the other hand, a 10 per cent
movement in the other direction would freeze them solid. In either
case it is probably reasonable to suppose that life on Earth would
come to an end. These are tight tolerances and suggest that the
Earth’s orbit has not changed very much over the last billion years or
so. It is likely also that a large change in the shape of the Earth’s orbit
would give extremes of climate probably beyond the ability of life
forms to survive. These are reassuring arguments: one does not need
to worry about whether the Earth might be flung into the Sun or into
interstellar space, or whether it might find itself on a collision course
with Venus. At first sight then astronomers are in a position to agree
with geologists and historians regarding the seemingly harmless
nature of the astronomical environment. Everything indeed would be
fine were it not for a single discordant fact — the existence of comets.
The outermost planet of the Solar System, so far as we know, is
Pluto, a small body at a mean distance of four light hours from the
Sun (although it is currently inside the orbit of Neptune). Out
beyond the known planets, we pass through uncharted territory:
there could be comets, asteroids, planets or moons at distances of
light days or light weeks, but we know nothing of them. Eventually,
light months to a light year beyond the Sun, we pass through a huge
cloud of mostly kilometer-sized bodies in a deeply frozen state: these
are the comets. There are at least as many comets orbiting the Sun as
there are stars in the Galaxy. Typically, a comet orbits the Sun in 3 to
6 million years, as against 250 years for Pluto, twelve for Jupiter and
one for the Earth. Comets are made of ice and dust, and possibly
larger bodies, and they are composed of the specific ‘universal mix’ of
chemical elements that is found in stars, less hydrogen and helium,
which remain gaseous even at a few degrees above absolute zero.
And it is here, on the icy outer margins of the Solar System, that we
find the potential for chaos on Earth. The existence of this cloud of
comets was only established to the satisfaction of most astronomers
around 1950.
So long as the stars were seen as the only significant component of
the Galaxy, the comet cloud could be regarded as relatively secure
and harmless. Every million years or so, a star would drift through
the cloud and gently churn up the orbits of the comets, only those
whose orbits led them almost into the path of the intruder being
disturbed sufficiently to be thrown off course, possibly into
interstellar space; the overall effect of these stellar encounters is
weak enough to leave the bulk of the comet cloud firmly intact. This
quiescent picture was almost universally held until the late 1970's,
and is entirely in keeping with a view of the Earth as a body isolated
from its environment and undisturbed by extraterrestrial visitation.
In recent years however, with the discovery by radio astronomers of
cold, dark massive nebulae in the Milky Way known as molecular
clouds, it has come to be realized that the reality is different, that the
comet cloud is in fact transient and unstable, and that the Earth is
very much affected by its astronomical environment.
The patchy irregular structure of the Milky Way is obvious on any
clear night and has long been known to be due to dark clouds of gas
and dust obscuring the starlight behind them. However nobody knew
how massive these nebulae were likely to be and it is only through
the studies by radio astronomers that we have now become aware
they are in fact a major constituent of the galactic disc, and include
the most massive single bodies in the Galaxy. This fact had been
missed because the clouds are for the most part extremely cold, only
a few degrees above absolute zero; and at such low temperatures
hydrogen, the commonest element, exists largely in molecular form
which is undetectable in ordinary light. However the presence of
molecular hydrogen can now be inferred through radio emissions
from carbon monoxide which acts as a tracer for hydrogen in
concentrations of cold cosmic gas. It turns out that a typical giant
molecular cloud is about 100 light years across — 30 metres on the
Greater London scale — and that they often contain dense
concentrations of young stars and, in all probability, enormous
numbers of newly formed comets as well, circulating freely within
the nebula. The mass of a giant molecular cloud may be half a million
times that of the Sun. A few thousand of these monsters orbit the
Galaxy, confined within the flat plane of the Milky Way, and the Sun
has probably penetrated ten or twenty of them in the course of its
history, and had close encounters with many more.
The effect of such encounters is calculable: the Solar System must
have been stripped of its comet cloud not once but many times in the
course of its history. Nevertheless it is there! It follows that the cloud
must from time to time be replenished. The source of the
replenishing comets, and how they come to be emplaced in orbits a
light year from the Sun, are interesting unresolved issues at the
present time; indeed the ultimate origin of comets has been a
controversial question for hundred of years. 74 But this need not
concern us here: the important thing is that we have now realized
there is a cosmic process with the potential for terrestrial
catastrophe. For during the Sun’s bumpy passage near or through a
molecular cloud, the comet cloud is subjected to severe gravitational
buffeting. The result is that, not only are many comets flung into
interstellar space, others are thrown into orbits which take them,
several million years later, directly into the planetary system.
It has also been realized recently that over and above the effects of
molecular clouds, which are encountered irregularly, the
gravitational influence of even larger structures in the Galaxy is also
important. These larger structures, spiral arms (see plate 13) and
even the galactic disc itself, create tides. At the surface of the Earth
their strength is minute, but at the distances characteristic of the
comets they have a profound effect on cometry orbits. As the Sun
goes round the Galaxy, passing in and out of spiral arms and up and
down through the galactic plane, the strength of the galactic tide
ebbs and flows in a periodic manner. Periods of high and low tidal
stress on the comet cloud occur, leading to periods of high and low
comet flux into the planetary system.
Plate 13. A typical galaxy, showing spiral arms: Messier 83, a
large, almost face-on spiral galaxy perhaps 10 million light years
away in the constellation Centaurus. This galaxy probably
resembles our own. It contains strong, complex spiral arms with
narrow dust lanes, young hot stars and cold, probably cometbearing nebulae. An exotic radio source lies at the nucleus of this
galaxy (photograph reproduced by kind permission of the Royal
Observatory, Edinburgh).
There are therefore two main sources of disturbance of comet orbits,
one erratic and one periodic. The variable galactic tide gives periods
of high and low comet influx depending on the Sun’s position in the
Galaxy, and superimposed on this regularity, molecular cloud
passages give rise to showers of comets into the terrestrial
neighbourhood, each shower lasting for something like three or four
million years. By ordinary standards, the term ‘shower’ is a trifle
exaggerated since the flux implies only a few comets per annum in
the vicinity of the Earth’s orbit; nevertheless it is entirely appropriate
on the cosmic scale. It will turn out that the Sun’s current position on
this grand, galactic scale is very relevant to our assessment of the
celestial hazards we face at the present time.
The fact that the flux of comets varies does not of course change the
nature of comets all other things being equal, the assumption that
comets are harmless might still apply. And indeed, despite their
occasional spectacular appearance due to the release of volatile gases
and dust close to the Sun, with one or more tails that stretch across
the sky (plate 14), comets are still widely represented by scientists as
presenting no danger. Their masses are said to be so inconsequential
in the Solar System scheme of things that a collision with a comet is
‘like an insect trying to knock down a locomotive’; and in any case
‘millions of years may pass before the occurrence of a fall of any
importance. We may thus live on without worrying about this highly
infrequent danger’. 75 Such statements do not accord with history.
And as we shall soon see, they do not accord with science either.
The fallacy in the argument is that not all comets are small and
insignificant. Most comets are only a few kilometers in diameter, the
larger ones being progressively rarer. However, although very large
comets are extremely infrequent, they are so massive that they
dominate the entire comet system. If a random sample of a hundred
comets were taken from the Sun’s comet cloud, half their total mass
would be contained in the largest one or two. In considering the
effects of the fluctuating rate at which comets arrive in the planetary
system, therefore, it has to be appreciated that the influx of mass is
overwhelmingly dominated by the rarest monsters. This seems an
obvious enough point, but it is continually overlooked, as a result of
which a fundamentally erroneous view of the astronomical
environment has been widely adopted by geologists, palaeontologists
and others now attempting to interpret Earth history in the new
catastrophist mould.
Comets more than about 50 kilometres in diameter will come in from
beyond Saturn and be deflected into unstable short-period orbits at
intervals of about fifty thousand years. Many of these will eventually
be thrown out of the planetary system — to wander perhaps in
isolation through the Galaxy forever — but many will also be caught
up by Jupiter’s powerful gravity and thrown into short-period orbits
that regularly intersect the Earth’s path around the Sun, over the few
million years of a comet shower therefore, or when the Sun is deeply
immersed in a spiral arm, perhaps twenty or thirty giant comets will
join the inner planets, there to be destroyed by the heat of the Sun,
every 100,000 years or so therefore, during a high-risk period, the
Earth encounters the debris left in the inner Solar System by a
disintegrating giant comet. Most of this debris is in practice
generated for only a fraction of the time before it is eventually blown
away by the solar wind. But it is in fact during these periods when
much of the freshly formed debris still circulates that the Earth is
now known to be particularly vulnerable. It is obviously necessary
that we learn a little more about how giant comets behave.
Plate 14. The Great Comet of 1843, as drawn by Piazzi Smyth in
March 1843, at the Cape of Good Hope (the comet was not
visible from Europe). It appears that such comets, moving along
the zodiac in short-period orbits, were a regular part of the night
sky in early historical times (reproduced by kind permission of
the Don Africana Library, Durban, South Africa).
An important facet of comet evolution is their tendency to split into
fragments, each fragment more or less temporarily leading an
independent life as a comet, with head and tail. The splitting of a
comet (‘a flaming torch of exceptional size’ according to Diodorus
Siculus) was allegedly reported in 372 BC by the Greek Ephorus,
each ‘star’ following a separate route over the sky. It has been
suggested that Ephorus may have invented the splitting to give
credence to a theory that comets were formed from the union of
stars, but it now seems much more likely that the ‘union of stars’
theory was derived from ancient observations of comets splitting.
Certainly Democritus reported that comet sometimes disintegrated
into stars. Similar observations are found, scattered through the
ages, in the records of the Chinese and Western astronomers, comets
sometimes dividing into four or five. Thus there is no question
nowadays that comets have a not infrequent tendency to split.
One of the most interesting comets observed to break up since the
keeping of reliable records was that named after an Austrian army
officer Biela in 1826 (although Pons, a janitor at the Marseilles
Observatory, had seen it in 1805). The comet had a period of about
seven years with an orbit which came within 20,000 miles of the
Earth’s, the Earth being nearest to the Biela orbit on 27 November
each year. During a subsequent return, on 13 January 1846, the
comet split into two under the eyes of the observers, a faint
companion detaching itself and rapidly growing in brightness. The
two comets were seen again on their return in September 1852, being
then 1,500,000 miles apart. But in 1865, when the comet pair were
due back, nothing was found: comet and companion had vanished.
And then on 27 November 1872, the Earth ran into a swarm of
meteors: ‘they fell in large flakes, the streaks of fire coming down
vertically in shower after shower with blinding balls of light and
noiseless explosions looking like cascades of fireworks’. It is
estimated that 160,000 shooting stars came in over the six hour
duration of the shower (plate 15). The Andromedid shower, as it is
called, was seen again on 27. November 1885, and can be seen
annually, much reduced, to the present day, the meteors having
spread around the entire cometary orbit. Biela’s comet, however, has
never been seen again. 76
Splitting is readily understood in the case of the giant parent of the
Kreutz grop, so-called, which skims the surface of the Sun: comet
material is very weak and the tidal forces exerted by the Sun’s
gravitational field are enough to generate a cascade of
fragmentations. However this externally forced splitting is only a
minor factor. Most splitting have occurred more or less anywhere
along the orbital track of a comet, and it is clear that some other
energy source must be involved. The nature of the source is
unknown; it might for example represent stored chemical energy or
the impact of a boulder in space. Thermal stresses, too, are adequate
to crack cometary ice, creating surface rubble and systems of cracks
which may be up to a hundred metres deep. Any fragmentation then
may be spontaneous, or it may be triggered by an explosive
encounter with a very small piece of Solar System debris.
Does it follow that all comets just evaporate away, leaving nothing
more than dust orbiting the Sun? It would seem not. There are now
several examples of comets that have an almost asteroidal
appearance in the telescope, as if they had degassed and been left
with a pumice-like surface. A number of asteroids moreover are in
comet-like orbits, so the impression has grown that a comet can
evolve not just by releasing gas and dust and running through a
hierarchy of fragmentations, but that it can also degenerate into one
or more inactive solid bodies. This has been confirmed by the recent
discovery that most Earth-crossing asteroids are shedding meteors
along their orbital paths.
Plate 15. Appearance of the sky during the night of 27 November
1872 due to the meteor shower resulting from the fragmentation
of Comet Biela. Note the conspicuous bolide (from ‘Les Etoiles
Filantes’ by Amedee Guillemin, Libraire Hachette, Paris, 1889).
Halley’s Comet entered the domain of the inner planets in 1986, and
was intercepted at around 70 kilometres a second by a small armada
of spacecraft. Most of the outgassing observed from this comet (plate
9) during the flyby of the Giottto and Vega space probes came from
only a few jets on the expose surface, the rest of the nucleus having a
black, solid appearance. It is possible that the comet was once active
over the whole of its surface, say 20,000 or more years ago, but that
the escaping gas has been gradually choked off by large dust particles
falling back on to the nucleus. In years to come, the comet will be to
all intents and purposes an asteroid. But it may still have an icy core.
Not all comets appear to be changing into asteroids however, and it
is likely that smaller or less dusty ones just evaporate away.
Larger comets, like several planetary satellites of similar dimensions,
could possibly have rocky interiors. Whether or not this is so, we may
expect that a giant comet, once it is captured into a short-period
orbit, will over several thousand years generate a vast meteor stream
along its orbital track until at an advanced stage of its evolution,
perhaps ten to twenty thousand years into its lifetime, it has turned
into an asteroidal body of still substantial size. From then on, there is
a less conspicuous but extended period of decline, perhaps two or
three times as long, during which the fragile core of the giant comet
is whittled away, in part by encounters with small pieces of debris
drifting around the Solar System. The result of this destruction is to
create a huge expanding swarm of asteroidal flotsam and jetsam
concentrated around the core and intermittently replenished from it.
The passage of the Earth through one such swarm was confirmed
with the aid of lunar seismometers in late June 1975. This
concentration of material was encountered as the Earth passed
through a meteor stream (figure 6). As many one-ton boulders struck
the Moon over five days as had hit it over the previous five years. A
duration of passage of five days corresponds to a swarm of diameter
at least 15 million kilometers. As the meteor stream in question, the
Beta Taurids, strikes the day-time hemisphere, nothing was seen
from the Earth, but a nighttime encounter of the Earth with this
material could have given rise to a spectacular fireball shower of
several days’ duration. If, however, the Earth had encountered this
material at an early stage of the swarm’s creation, when its diameter
was say 1 percent of its 1975 value, then although the encounter
would have endured for only a few hours, it would have yielded a
fireball impact rate a million times higher. This is the likely cause of
the rare day-time fireball swarms recorded by the Chinese
chroniclers. In addition, there would be a greatly enhanced
probability of being struck by much larger bodies. In the aftermath of
a major splitting or a major fragmentation, a giant comet or its
asteroidal remnant is likely to be at its most dangerous. For a period
of hundreds of years, a huge concentrated population of boulders
and larger bodies will be present in the swarm with a greatly
enhanced risk of planetary encounters. With the passage of time of
course, the individual bodies will further disintegrate and the dust
will spread away from its parent orbit so as to form a fat elliptical
tube penetrated by the inner planetry system; later still, a few
thousand years after the fragmentation, the dust will have spread
into a flattish disc, the zodiacal cloud, occupying the whole domain of
the terrestrial planets.
Figure 6. Diagram showing the average number of meteoroids
striking the Moon on each day of the year over the period 1972-
76, as recorded with seismometers left by the Apollo astronauts.
The conspicuous peak at the end of June represents the flux over
a few days in 1975 due to a swarm of more massive meteoroids
coinciding with the Beta Taurid stream.
The astronomical framework for a theory of terrestrial catastrophism
is now essentially complete, and it provides a perspective that is very
different from the one that has dominated scientific thinking over
the last three hundred years. It is also very different from the picture
currently adopted by many modern catastrophists in the Earth
sciences who, recently converted by hard geological evidence of
astronomical inputs in particular strata, still ignore the hard
astronomical evidence obtained by looking upwards.
This ignoring of basic data has two obvious outcomes. One is that
discussion of catastrophism in geological circles is even yet largely
conditioned by a view of Earth history which is essentially
uniformitarian, with single, giant impacts occasionally interrupting a
basically internal evolution. Such matters as the possibility of
galactic cycles in the terrestrial record, or the climatic effects of
stratospheric dusting from the debris of giant comets, are excluded
by fiat. Another outcome is that catastrophe from the sky is assumed
to be something that happens only on the vast timescales one meets
in the geological record; the concept of astronomical catastrophe on
historical timescales is effectively written off at the outset. We can
illustrate these points by considering the Sun’s orbit in the Galaxy
and its encounters with massive interstellar nebulae. These latter, as
we have seen, are distributed in a flat plane more or less coincident
with the Milky Way.
In relation to the disc of the Galaxy, and in common with the other
stars in the disc, the Sun has two components of motion; one an upand-down oscillation carrying it through the plane of the disc every
30 million years or so, the other an in-and-out motion with respect
to the galactic centre. This latter ‘galactic year’ is about 250 million
years long. Now stars and molecular clouds are concentrated towards
both the plane of the disc, towards the inner regions of the Galaxy,
and in spiral arms. The Solar System therefore encounters nebulae
preferentially in these regions. The cumulative effect of these
encounters is to impose longterm variations on the comet flux, with
timescales of around 30 and 250 million years. The longer timescale
is not strictly periodic since both the solar orbit and the presence of
molecular clouds in the Galaxy may well be irregular; but the shorter
30 million year timescale, due to the galactic tide, should be more
nearly a true period.
Consider now the situation when the Sun is inside a spiral arm.
When the Sun is in the centre of the arm, and so also in the plane of
the Galaxy, the tidal stress acting on the comet cloud is at a
maximum, and the comet influx is at its greatest. The effect of the
up-and-down motion in the Galaxy during any spiral ai m passage is
to impose a shallow porpoise-like motion on the Sun which causes it
to coast along just above and just below the arm between successive
penetrations. Whilst lingering at these levels the tidal stress again
reaches a maximum, and so at the points of entry and departure
from the spiral arm the galactic tide is reduced, causing the comet
flux to decline. The effect therefore is to interrupt the basic 30-
million-year cycle, giving rise to what is essentially a 15-million-year
one. The effect may therefore be to force a 15-million periodicity on
the Earth, with weak and strong cycles alternating. In a poorly
determined terrestrial record, this might be misinterpreted as a 30-
million-year one. Further, it is likely the comet cloud is replenished
when the Sun passes through the spiral arms of the Galaxy. Comet
activity on the Earth may be appreciable only during such passages,
and if so, the terrestrial record will show a 15-million year cycle, but
one which is intermittent, switching on for 50 to 100 million years
while the Sun is immersed in a spiral arm, and declining for a similar
period outside it. If this galactic theory is correct, Earth history may
therefore have an episodic character, with 15- or 30-million-year
cycles switching on and off. The evidence suggests that this is exactly
what is observed (chapter 14). It should be said, however, that the
galactic environment is still not well explored. Several galactic
periodicities could be imposed on Earth processes, and their relative
strengths are still a matter for the empirical discovery of geologists
and not the revealed wisdom of astronomers.
A question of immediate and even human importance is where we
stand in relation to these periodic surges of comet activity. The Sun
is near the plane of the Galaxy and has also just emerged from the
edge of a spiral arm of the Galaxy, known as the Orion arm. Further,
it is at present moving through an environment which seems to be
that of an old disintegrating molecular cloud. There are numerous
dense nebulae in the solar neighbourhood, most of which seem to be
organized into a ring of gas and young blue stars. The blue stars form
a belt over the night sky, noted by Ptolemy as long ago as AD 150,
and known as Gould’s Belt. The ring is inclined at about 20 degrees
to the plane of the Galaxy; the Orion nebula to the south, and stars in
the constellation Scorpio in the north, are part of this complex of
material. This massive ring of stars and gas is expanding rapidly,
following some energetic event of 30 million years ago, and only
about 6 to 9 million years ago the Sun passed through the rim,
moving at some 20 to 25 kilometres per second. Because of the mass
of material in this ring, the comet cloud must have been disturbed
during this close encounter. Once disturbed, the comets at the outer
edge of the comet cloud fall into the inner planetary system in about
3 to 5 million years. We expect, therefore, that the Earth is in the
declining tail of a comet shower which peaked 3 to 5 million years
ago. Thus the conditions which would yield an exceptional flux of
comets on to the Earth — positioning near the galactic plane,
proximity to a spiral arm, and recent passage through a system of
molecular clouds — are all simultaneously met by the Solar System at
the present time.
As noted, very few comets present any danger to the Earth but the
occasional giant comet that is trapped in an Earth-crossing orbit of
short period rapidly develops in such a manner as to intermittently
generate a substantial swarm of bodies which are commonly
asteroidal. The giant comets recur at intervals of about 100,000
years during a shower whilst the terrestrial encounters with the
asteroidal swarms, which may continue for a century or two, recur at
intervals of about a millennium.
To summarize: we expect both galactic periodicities and irregular
cometary surges to be imprinted on the terrestrial record. Of the
periodicities, one of around 30 million years (or 15 million years in
particular circumstances) is likely to be the strongest. Because of the
Sun’s position near to both the Orion spiral arm and the plane of the
Galaxy, we expect that the Earth is even now in a period of enhanced
risk. The risk is further enhanced by the fact that the Sun has
recently passed through a complex of debris associated with Gould’s
Belt.
We should look therefore for a currently disturbed comet cloud and a
currently disturbed Earth. Such evidence exists (table 5). We expect
the disturbances of the Earth and its biosphere to be profound: as we
shall see, the extinction rate, the incidence of mountain building, the
rise and fall of oceans, reversals of the Earth’s magnetic field, are all
expected to be under the control of the Galaxy. During peaks of
activity, with a large disintegrating comet in the inner planetary
system, we expect climatic recessions at random intervals of around
a thousand years reaching peak intensity every hundred thousand
years or so. This is an average picture however and more has to be
known of recent and forthcoming giant comets to calculate the
Earth’s immediate past and future with any precision. Nevertheless,
it follows that the Earth’s environment must be currently hazardous
because of the intermittent presence of great comets.There is strong
evidence, indeed, that the last giant comet entered an Earth-crossing
orbit only a few tens of thousands of years ago, so its asterodial
debris (including its resultant zodiacal cloud) are in orbit even now.
The comet should therefore indeed have made its mark on history as
well as on recent geology. Furthermore, a cometary body at least 250
kilometres in diameter, Chiron by name, has already been sighted in
a chaotic orbit out beyond Saturn and there is good reason to believe
it may be entering an Earth-crossing orbit within the next 100,000
years: Chiron may then be responsible for the next major ice age.
Chiron is obviously not of great urgency but the same cannot be said
of the asteroidal remnants of the most recent giant comet.
Unfortunately most of these Earth-crossing bodies are completely
uncharted and we have no means of knowing which of these will
produce the next significant encounter with the Earth.
The Pleistocene ice epoch began about 2.5 million years ago,
consistent with a sudden influx of comets from the disturbed cloud,
although mountain glaciers were beginning to extend even before
then. This epoch, like others which have occurred in Earth history, is
broken up into a series of very erratic ice ages, each of duration
typically 10,000 to 100,000 years. Again, these timescales are about
those associated with intermittent arrival and disintegration of the
greatest comets, although no great precision can be put on the
figures. The last ice age ended just over 10,000 years ago. We are
therefore, at the moment, living in a warm interglacial period.
Interspersing such warm periods, however, are short cooling
episodes, very sudden in onset, and lasting typically ten to a hundred
years. During these episodes the Earth’s climate plunges into glacial
severity. Such cooling episodes may be of great human consequence
and will be discussed presently; for the moment we note only that for
the first time there is a scientific basis for a catastrophist
interpretation of human history; and we begin to discern that the
threat form the sky may have a wintry aspect. Let us take a closer
look at the material orbiting in the space around us.
10 — Cosmic Swarms
Between 3 and 15 November each year, the Earth runs through a
meteor stream coming from a small area in the constellation of
Taurus the bull. A young stream, made up of meteors not long
released from their parent comet, would be narrow and probably
strong, and the Earth would pass through it in half a day or so. The
Geminid meteor stream is one such, the Earth encountering it on the
December each year and the shower being over by 12 December The
Taurid meteor stream, on the other hand, takes the Earth 12 days to
cross, and it is not very intense; it ‘looks old’. It has two main
branches, northern and southern, emerging from slightly different
parts of the constellation, the branches being of about equal
intensity.
The Earth runs into the same meteor complex in the summer but the
meteors, striking the day-time hemisphere of the planet, are not then
visible to the naked eye. This day-time stream, the so-called Beta
Taurids, was discovered with radar using the Jodrell Bank radio
telescope in the 1950's. The Beta Taurids come in between 24 June
and 6 July with a sharp peak on 30 June each year. The orbits of
these daytime Taurids match those of the southern Taurids closely.
At first sight it seems that there is nothing exceptional about the
Taurids; they are only one of seven or eight strong meteor streams
which occur at various times throughout the year, and they are not
particularly intense. To the casual observer the only noticeable
feature of the stream is the high proportion of fireballs it produces,
bright meteors which light up the landscape. Again, this is an
indication of age, smaller meteors in the stream having long ago
been destroyed in interplanetary space by processes of erosion.
Orbiting with the Taurid meteor stream is a small comet, discovered
in 1818 by Pons. An orbit was calculated for this comet by Johann
Encke, a pupil of the famous mathematician Gauss who had
developed a method for calculating the orbits of bodies from their
movement across the sky. Encke not only found an orbit, he showed
that the comet was the same as one detected by Mechain in 1786,
Caroline Herschel in 1795 and Pons himself in 1805. Encke predicted
that the comet would return in May 1822 and in due course its return
was observed, from Australia. There are interesting historical
parallels with Halley’s Comet; in both cases the comet is named, not
after the discoverer, but after the man who calculated the orbit;
Encke’s Comet was the first instance after Halley of the recognized
return of a comet; and, like Halley’s Comet, it established the
existence of a new class of object. Its orbit, in fact, is unique amongst
the known comets.
There are about a hundred known short-period comets (say with
orbital periods less than about 12 years as against a few million years
for the long-period ones). All of these, with the sole exception of
Encke’s Comet, are in orbits which sooner or later lead to a close
encounter with Jupiter and ejection from the Solar System by the
powerful gravitational pull of that planet. But Encke’s Comet has
somehow established itself in a stable orbit such that it never comes
within the Jovian sphere of influence. It does however come close to
the Earth. In addition there may be one or two thousand asteroids
over a kilometer across in orbits which make them a potential
collision hazard with the Earth. None is more than about 10
kilometres across, their surfaces are extremely dark, and fewer than
fifty have been discovered. They are known as Apollo asteroids after
the prototype discovered in 1932. Encke’s Comet is in fact the sole
example of an active comet in an Apollo orbit. Without decay or
collision, the comet would probably continue in orbit for tens of
millions of years. The orbit is highly elongated (figure 7) and the
comet may approach to within 0.34 astronomical units of the Sun,
when its surface temperature reaches 450 degrees centigrade, and go
out to 4.1 astronomical units, when its temperature is -120 degrees
centigrade. The comet’s orbit is inclined at only 12 degrees to that of
the Earth’s. This low inclination and the shortness of the orbital
period, ensure that there is frequent interaction between the Earth
and the material of the Taurid stream, with the potential for
occasional very close encounters with Encke’s Comet. On the face of
it, then, the Taurids seem to be an elderly, diffuse meteor stream
with no peculiar characteristics other than their association with a
comet, in an unusual orbit, and just too faint to be seen with the
naked eye. There is much more to the Taurid stream, however, than
this.
In a study of fireball records from the first to the fifteenth centuries
AD, the astronomers Astapovic and Terenteva 78 found that the
fireball flux from the Taurids was much more intense a thousand
years ago (see figure 4 (b)), indeed the northern stream was then the
stronger of the two. The Soviet astronomers found that ‘Taurids were
the most powerful shower of the year in the eleventh century (with
42 fireballs belonging to them) and no shower, not even the great
ones, could be compared with them as to activity’. In the not too
distant past, therefore, the Taurids were revealing themselves as
outstanding performers in the night sky.
Two recent discoveries confirm the suspicion that the stream is a
remarkable one. The first of these is that, amongst the 80 or so
known Apollos, 6 or 7 are orbiting within the Taurid meteor stream
(table 6). There are some interesting object in table 6. Hephaistos,
for example, is the largest known Apollo asteroid, being about 10
kilometres in diameter. Its orbit closely resembles that of the comet’s
in every respect but one: the long axis is roughly at right angles to
that of the Encke orbit. The orientations of these orbits change very
slowly, only a few degrees in a millennium. It could be that Encke’s
Comet and Hephaistos were once one body, but if so they must have
separated over 20,000 years ago. Then there is Oljato, a dark
asteroid about 1.5 kilometres across. This body shows visual
evidence, through the telescope, of slight outgassing. Further, when
the Pioneer Venus probe passed near the asteroid on several
occasions in 1982 and 1983, magnetometers on board recorded
sudden changes in the magnetic field, as if the probe were passing
through magnetized gas in the wake of the asteroid. 79 It looks as if
the ‘asteroid’ is in fact an almost defunct comet. Each of these bodies
pursues an elliptical orbit around the Sun, but because of the
influence of the planets, Jupiter and Saturn in particular, these orbits
slowly evolve. The size and shape do not change greatly but the
orientation of the orbit in space does. First, relative to the mean
plane of the Solar System, the inclination of the orbit slowly
oscillates up and down; but more significant is the orientation, in the
Earth’s orbital plane, of the orbit’s long axis. If the asteroids were
unconnected with each other and with Encke’s Comet their long axes
would be orientated randomly; but they are on the whole closely
bunched. It can be shown that these is less than one chance in a
million that even three asteroids would lie so close to the orbital
track of Encke’s Comet by chance. Now it is very unlikely that these
bodies are the only ones orbiting within the Taurid meteors:
discovery of the Apollo asteroids as a whole is only about 5 per cent
complete. We are therefore led to the remarkable conclusion that
there are between one and two hundred asteroids of more than a
kilometer diameter orbiting within the Taurid meteor stream. It
seems clear that we are looking at debris from the breakup of an
extremely large object. The disintegration, or sequence of
disintegrations, must have taken place within the past twenty or
thirty thousand years as otherwise the asteroids would have spread
around the inner planetary system and be no longer recognizable as a
stream.
The second discovery, due mainly to the Czechoslovakian
astronomer Stohl, 80 is that enveloping the Taurids, Comet Encke
and these particular asteroids is a broad tube of meteoric debris. The
Earth enters this tube in April and does not emerge again until about
the end of June, entering again in October and re-emerging in
December. It seems that about half the ‘sporadic’ meteors one sees —
random shooting stars which do not seem to belong to any specific
meteor stream — are not sporadic at all, but are part of this immense
swathe of material, of which the Taurids and the bodies within it are
the core. The Stohl stream is apparently double (figure 7) due
probably to an exceptional fragmentation which, if the orbital
backtracking of several Taurid meteors by Whipple and Hamid 81 is
accepted, occurred around 2700 BC when the primary body
encountered a stray body in the asteroid belt between Mars and
Jupiter. This pronounced splitting into two streams could be
significant in view of the dual character of divinity generally
discussed in earlier chapters.
The mass of the meteoric material within the Stohl stream is 10 or 20
trillion grammes (we use trillion in the American sense of a million
million times a million). The mass of the co-orbiting asteroids is
likely to be about the same. Adding in the mass of gas and very fine
dust which must have been blown away subsequently, we find that
the original body must have been about 100 kilometres across. We
have found our giant comet!
Figure 7. Diagram showing the orbit of Comet Encke (thick line
corresponding also to the orbit of the Beta Taurids) and the two
broad meteoroidal swarms discovered by the Czechoslovakian
astronomer Stohl. The similarities between these orbits and the
general merging of these streams with the meteoroidal complex
and zodiacal cloud in the plane of the ecliptic suggest a common
origin in the past from a single giant progenitor comet.
The existence, in the not too distant past, of a giant comet in an
Apollo orbit also explains the existence of the zodiacal light. In the
early evening, or just before sunrise, this delicate, beautiful pyramid
of light can be seen rising out of the horizon, lying along the line of
the zodiacal constellations. It is best seen in the tropics, where it
rivals the Milky Way, but unlike the Milky Way it has a more regular,
smooth appearance. We have seen that the zodiacal light is made up
of light scattered from myriads of bodies orbiting between the inner
planets. It is brightest close in to the Sun, and it could be that ancient
Egyptian portrayals of the Sun as a winged disc refer to the zodiacal
‘wings’ extending from it. From the rate at which the Earth sweeps
up meteors one finds that the mass of small meteoric material in the
zodiacal cloud, say particles less than a millimeter diameter, is
perhaps 20 to 40 billion tons. About half of this belongs to the Stohl
stream. Now the particles orbiting within the cloud collide at a few
kilometers persecond, and break up, the microscopic debris
eventually spiraling into the Sun. The zodiacal cloud loses between
10 and 40 tons of mass every second in this way, and without
replenishment it would vanish in about fifty or a hundred thousand
years. And yet, there are no adequate sources of replenishment for
this dust at the present time. 82 Encke’s Comet is the major known
supplier of dust in the inner planetary system at present, but even so,
it loses only an average of a ton a second of material over an orbit,
only 0.3 tons per second of which is dust; it cannot even remotely
resupply either Stohl stream or zodiacal cloud. Once more, there
seems to be no avoiding the conclusion that the progenitor of Comet
Encke and the Stohl stream must have been a truly exceptional body,
in the same class as the great historical comets. And it must have
been pouring out dust copiously in the not too distant past, since the
Stohl stream, diffusing into the zodiacal cloud as a whole, would not
stay recognizable for more than twenty thousand years or so.
Backtracking the orbits of Encke and Oljato, we find that 9.500 years
ago the orbits were nearly identical. It is possible there was a major
disintegration of the prime body then, with much debris created of
which Comet Encke and Oljato are the largest known bodies,
followed by similar disintegrations of the other comets and asteroids
of the stream. Oljato itself is in an orbit which brought it virtually
into the Earth’s orbital plane for some centuries around 3000-3500
BC, ensuring a series of very close encounters with the Earth over the
period. If, as is very likely, it was then an active comet, it must have
been a spectacular zodiacal traveler, whose cycles of coming and
going, flaring and fading, must have made it a perplexing object in its
own right, even if overshadowed by the more formidable Encke. The
meteor orbits, traced back in time, seem also to come together at
particular epochs. The present-day northern Taurids, for example,
may have broken away from Encke’s Comet or a Taurid asteroid
about a thousand years ago, consistently with the surge of activity
recorded in the sky around that time, particularly by the Chinese
astronomers (figure 4). The whole complex therefore seems to be
undergoing an avalanching self-destruction as the debris accumulate
and collide. Orbital backtracking of the Taurid meteors and asteroids
thus reveals a system which has been evolving actively within the
timescale of civilization.
Thus unique complex of debris is undoubtedly the greatest collision
hazard facing the Earth at the present time. It is likely that hundreds
of thousands of bodies, each capable of yielding a multi-megaton
explosion on Earth, are orbiting within the stream. Such bodies are
expected from the progressive disintegration of the asteroids —
inactive comets — with it. From time to time collisions will remove
some proportion of the dusty crust from an asteroid, exposing its icy
interior. It will then become a comet for a few centuries. Probably,
also, there are one or more concentrations of material — temporary
swarms — arising from the rapid disintegration of one or two
dominant but yet undiscovered bodies within the Taurid stream. The
Moon, as we have noted already, ran through such a swarm between
22-26 June 1975. Lunar seismometers left by the Apollo astronauts
recorded the impacts of a swarm of ton-sized boulders, as many
hitting the Moon over those five days as had struck it over the
previous five years (figure 6).
We seem to have found, then, the vital element missing form the
works of the early Biblical catastrophists — Whiston, Radlof,
Donnelly, Velikovsky and the rest — namely, a scientific rationale, a
relatively secure astronomical framework. Biblical and geological
catastrophism are, after all, inextricably linked. While this clearly
justifies an urgent reappraisal of the ancient tales of celestial
catastrophe, the new information is extremely awkward for a
generation of astronomers who insisted that Velikovsky was no more
than an erudite charlatan. Astronomers, indeed scientists generally,
like to think themselves as tolerant judges and very adaptable to
fresh discoveries. The evidence in this instance is however mostly the
other way. One may therefore expect that in some circles the data
now emerging from the Taurid meteor stream will be ignored in the
hope that something reassuring will turn up. While this is a timehonoured scholarly ploy for the handling of discordant new facts,
there is a moral dimension in this instance: the swarm has teeth. As
to how sharp these teeth can be, we shall now see by looking at two
impacts which have taken place during the present millennium.
11 — Close Encounters
Just after 7:15 am local time on 30 June 1908, in the central Siberian
plateau, there took place an impact of ferocious intensity. Yet so
isolated and vast is this region (half as large again as the USA), it was
almost twenty years before the Western world became aware of the
event. 83
On the night of 30 June and 1 July, the sky throughout Europe was
strangely bright. Throughout the United Kingdom, over 3,000 miles
from the point of impact, it was possible to play cricket and read
newspapers by the glow from the night sky. From Belgium came
descriptions of a huge red glow over the horizon, after sunset, as if a
great fire was raging. This strangely bright sky was seen throughout
Europe, European Russia, Western Siberia and as far south as the
Caucasus mountains. Photographs were taken at midnight or later,
with exposures of about a minute, in Sweden, in Scotland, and as far
east as the university city of Kazan, on the banks of the river Volga.
And yet the Urals, dividing Europe from Asia, are 400 miles east of
Kazan, and the impact point was over 1,200 miles beyond that again.
Much comment was excited in newspapers and learned journals at
the time. Some thought that icy particles had somehow formed high
in the atmosphere and were reflecting sunlight. Others considered
that a strange auroral disturbance was involved. The Danish
astronomer Kohl drew attention to the fact that several very large
meteors had recently been observed over Denmark and thought that
comet dust in the high atmosphere might account for the
phenomenon. But there was no agreement as to what had happened.
Over 500 miles to the south of the fall, a seismograph in the city of
Irkutsk near Lake Baikal, close to the Mongolian border, registered
strong earth tremors.
Nearly 400 miles south-west of the explosion, at 7:17 am on 30 June,
a train driver on the Trans-Siberian express had to halt the train for
fear of derailment due to the tremors and commotion.
Fierce gusts of wind were felt in towns 300 to 400 miles away.
In an Irkutsk newspaper dated 2 July it was reported that, in a
village more than 200 miles from the Tunguska river, peasants had
seen a fireball brighter than the sun approach the ground, followed
by a huge cloud of black smoke, a forked tongue of flame and a loud
crash as if from gunfire. ‘All the villagers ran into the street in panic.
The old women wept and everyone thought the end of the world was
approaching’.
Almost twenty years later, a farmer recalled that, 125 miles from the
point of impact:
When I sat down to have my breakfast beside my plough, I
heard sudden bangs, as if from gunfire. My horse fell on its
knees. From the north side above the forest a flame shot up.
Then I saw that the fir forest had been bent over by the wind and
I thought of a hurricane. I seized hold of my plough with both
hands so that it would not be carried away. The wind was so
strong that it carried off some of the soil from the surface of the
ground, and then the hurricane drove a wall of water up the
Angora.
From another village at the same distance out, the local newspaper
reported that:
A noise as from a strong wind was heard, followed by a fearful
crash, accompanied by a subterranean shock ... This was
followed by two equally forceful blows and an extraordinary
underground roar like the sound of a number of trains passing
simultaneously over rails .... a heavenly body of fiery appearance
cut across the sky ... when the flying object touched the horizon,
a huge flame shot up that cut the sky in two.
Forty miles out, at the Vanavara trading post, a farmer was sitting on
the porch of his home. He reported:
I saw a huge fireball that covered an enormous part of the sky ...
the whole northern sky appeared to be covered with fire. I felt a
great heat as if my shirt had caught fire. Afterwards it became
dark and at the same time I felt an explosion that threw me
several feet from the porch. I lost consciousness.
At this distance too, ‘the ground shook and an incredible long
pronounced roaring was heard. Everything round about was
shrouded in smoke and fog from the burning and fallen trees’.
The closest eyewitness description came from a family in a tent 25
miles south-east of the epicentre. The family had been thrown in the
air and several were knocked out. When they recovered they found
the forest ablaze around them and much of it devastated. It is not
unlikely that some nomadic herdsmen were closer to the centre of
the impact; if so, they would have perished in the blast. A thousand
reindeer may have been killed as well.
Local Siberian newspapers carried stories of a fireball in the sky, and
a fearful explosion, but by the autumn of 1908 these stories had died
out, and they went unnoticed in St Petersburg (Leningrad), Moscow
and the west. The region was arguably one of the most inaccessible
places on Earth, in the centre of Siberia. It comprises swamps, huge
pine forests and peat bogs. It was populated only by nomadic
reindeer herdsmen (the Tungus, now renamed Evenki) and large,
ferocious mosquitoes. However rumours of an extraordinary event
persisted, transmitted back by geologists and other intrepid
researchers working in the area. These attracted the attention of a
meteorite researcher, Leonard Kulik, who in 1921 led an expedition
travelling from Petrograd (Leningrad) on the Trans-Siberian express
across the Urals into Siberia, stopping finally at Kansk. Here he
learned that the impact must have taken place hundreds of miles to
the north, near the Tunguska river. It was not until 1927 that an
expedition, again led by Kulik, finally penetrated to the site of the
1908 explosion.
Through this expedition, and others which followed, the event may
be recreated. The fireball was blindingly bright, even dimming the
Sun in comparison, and was seen over an area almost 1,000 miles
across. It approached on a shallow trajectory from a roughly
southern direction, leaving a thick dust trail and crossing the sky in a
few seconds. After it had disappeared from the sky, a vertical column
of fire was seen over the impact site, and was visible from as far away
as 300 miles.
Deafening explosions were heard, followed by thunder and rumbling,
the explosion being heard over a circular area almost 900 miles
across, the concussion wave being enough to throw many witnesses
to the ground. Over this area also buildings were shaken by ground
tremors. (It was later learned that seismographs had detected these
as far away as the USA and Java). The object seems to have
disintegrated at about 5 miles altitude, halted by the atmosphere,
effectively converting its energy of motion into heat and so creating a
ball of fire. It broke up over an area known as the Southern Swamp, a
depression 4 to 7 miles across consisting of peat bogs and swamps.
Surrounding this area was forest, flattened and uprooted by the blast
to a distance of about 40 miles, although the shock waves extended
almost 70 miles out. Some trees remained standing, shipped of their
branches. Out to a distance between 10 and 20 miles from the
epicentre, brushwood and trees had been scorched on their inward
facing sides.
The energy of the explosion has been calculated from the extent of
the flattened forest, and from the small pressure waves which arrived
at the speed of sound and were record on barographs around the
world, 84 the latter calculation being the more reliable. The wave
trains were unlike any others which have been recorded up until that
time but resemble those obtained from a hydrogen bomb explosion
(figure 8). It seems that the impact had an energy of 30 to 40
megatons, about that from a few dozen ordinary hydrogen bombs,
and similar to the Boulder City impact of the prologue.
Figure 8. Pressure waves from the Tunguska explosion detected
in south-east England 5,720 km from the impact. For
comparison, pressure waves from hydrogen bomb explosions
are shown also: Bikini to barograph at Aspendale 5,920 km, and
Novaya Zemlaya to Aspendale 14,000 km. from this an impact
energy of about 30 megatons can be inferred. From E.L.Deacon
(note 84).
The date of fall (30 June) corresponds to the passage of the Earth
through the maximum of the Beta Taurid stream. 85 From this and
its trajectory, it appears that the Tunguska object was part of the
Taurid complex. Probably, the Earth passed through a swarm within
the stream. The occurrence, this century, of an impact with the
energy of a hydrogen bomb does give cause for some concern, and it
is interesting to speculate on whether one’s historical perceptions
would be quite the same had the bolide struck an urban area or a
city. As it happens, however, the Tunguska impact is fairly trivial:
In this year, on the Sunday before the Feast of St. John the
Baptist, after sunset when the moon had first become visible a
marvelous phenomenon was witnessed by some five or more
men who were sitting there facing the moon. Now there was a
bright new moon, and as usual in that phase its horns were tilted
toward the east; and suddenly the upper horn split in two. From
the midpoint of the division a flaming torch sprang up, spewing
out, over a considerable distance, fire, hot coals, and sparks.
Meanwhile the body of the moon which was below writhed, as it
were, in anxiety, and, to put it in the words of those who
reported it to me and saw it with their own eyes, the moon
throbbed like a wounded snake. Afterwards it resumed its
proper state. This phenomenon was repeated a dozen times or
more, the flame assuming various twisting shapes at random
and then returning to normal. Then after these transformations
the moon from horn to horn, that is along its whole length, took
on a blackish appearance. The present writer was given this
report by men who saw it with their own eyes, and are prepared
to stake their honour on an oath that they have made no
addition or falsification in the above narrative.
This curious report is written in the chronicles of the medieval monk
known as Gervase of Canterbury. The year of the event was AD 1178
and the date, 18 June on the co-called Julian calendar, converts to
the evening of 25 June on the modern Gregorian one. If real, it is
clear that some extraordinary event on the Moon is being described,
and the meteorite expert Hartung 86 proposed that what was
observed and recorded 800 years ago was the impact of a body on
the Moon. The flame, he suggested, was the writhing of incandescent
gases, or sunlight reflecting from dust thrown out of the crater. The
blackish appearance of the Moon along its whole length was a
temporary suspension of dust buoyed up by a transient atmosphere.
Of course, a tale recorded by a medieval monk, by itself, need not
signify much, although the date is suggestive. But it happens that in
this case there is a strong physical evidence in support. The Moon’s
surface is sprinkled with impact craters, fossil remnants of past
collisions with small bodies; and because the lunar surface is very
old, the craters represent the accumulated history of four billion
years of bombardment. Hartung deduced that if there was a crater, it
would be at least 7 miles in diameter, possess bright rays extending
from it for at least seventy miles, and would lie between 30 and 60
north, 75 and 105 east on the Moon. These co-ordinates are the
equivalent of latitude and longitude on Earth and are measured,
roughly, from the nearest point of the Moon facing the Earth. The
crater would therefore lie very near the edge of the Moon or possibly
be just over it, on the far side.
As it happens, one crater with the predicated characteristics exists.
There is a crater named after the seventeenth-century heretic
Giordano Bruno (see plate 16). This crater is located 36 N and 105 E,
within the predicted area. It is 13 miles in diameter and is
distinguished by its remarkable brightness, and by the brilliant
system of rays which extend several hundred miles out form it. Such
rays are not uncommon around lunar craters; they are formed by
debris thrown far beyond the crater rim during the explosive
excavation. Any binoculars turned to the full Moon show such a ray
system radiating out from the young crater Tycho; this crater is
about 40 miles across and its ray system extends over much of the
facing atmosphere of the Moon. Giordano Bruno lies just beyond the
edge of the Moon and its rays are not visible form the Earth.
Nevertheless, Lunik and Apollo missions have revealed that the
crater and its ray system are impressively brilliant, even although
they come from the crater only a fraction of the size of Tycho. The
significance is that bombardment by microscopic particles and gas
atoms has no had time to dull the material around the crater. It has
been very freshly exposed.
Plate 16. The Giordano Bruno crater on the Moon, photographed
during the ill-fated Apollo 13 mission. Note the strikingly vivid
(i.e. fresh) rays indicative of recent formation (by kind
permission of the Johnson Space Center Mapping Science
Laboratory ).
Further evidence in support of the identification was forthcoming
from an investigation carried out by the lunar astronomers Callame
and Mulholland. 87 They found that although the crater was 15 into
the far side of the Moon the ejecta would be hurled such distances
that ‘the event would not have been only visible but sufficiently
apocalyptic to have justified the description given in the Canterbury
Chronicle’. They also found direct evidence in the form of a small
natural vibration of the Moon. Although the Moon rotates so that the
same face is always pointing towards the Earth, there are also small
oscillations about this position. Some of these can be stimulated by
an impact, in the same way that the a weight suspended on a rope
can be set swinging by a blow. A blow on the scale needed to excavate
Giordano Bruno would have yielded a tiny wobble of the Moon about
its polar axis, a surface movement of no more than a few metres,
with the period of three years. Detection of such a movement by eye
form 380,000 kilometers would be impossible even with the most
powerful telescopes. There is, however, another way.
Since the early 1970's, laser ranging of the Moon has become
possible because of reflections left on the lunar surface by the Apollo
and Lunik landing missions. Once a week since 1973, a laser beam is
fired from the McDonald Observatory in Texas towards one of these
reflectors and the arrival of the returning light is timed to about a
billionth of a second. Several thousand such observations have been
made over the years and much fine structure in the motion of the
Moon has been found. Many new results have come from these
observations, one of them being the discovery of a 15-metre
oscillation of the lunar surface about its polar axis, with a period of
about three years. This mode of vibration dies out over twenty
thousand years or so, and the result can only be explained by a recent
large impact, whose magnitude was about that required to form the
Bruno crater.
Many studies of impact cratering have been carried out, and for a
given size of crater it is possible to infer the energy of the impact
which created it. It turns out that the Giordano Bruno crater was
probably caused by a missile a mile or so across stinking the Moon
with an energy of about 100,000 megatons, or about ten times the
combined nuclear arsenals of east and west.
The Giordano Bruno event took place in the century when the Taurid
fireball flux was at a peak (see figure 4). It is remarkable that the
terrestrial implications of this extraordinary event seem to have gone
generally unrecognized. 88 The damage from blast and heat alone
caused by such an impact on land would be far greater than that
described in our opening story; probably, it would cause prompt
destruction of life over continental dimensions; and probably too, it
would have even more disastrous effects through the global climatic
catastrophe. And yet the effective target area of the Moon is only
about a twentieth that of the Earth, and the impact, if the
interpretation given above is correct, took place less than a
millennium ago, when the Taurid meteors were highly active. The
basic thesis of this book is that the terrestrial environment is a good
deal more hazardous than has been realized so far. In the Bruno
impact, it would be hard to find a more dramatic confirmation.
At the moment of the Bruno impact the Moon was low in the sky
over much of Europe, being visible east of a line stretching from
Oslo, Stockholm, southern England, north-west France and Spain,
and along the south-east coast of Brazil. It seems very likely that
others saw and recorded the Bruno or similar events. It may be that,
tucked away in the archives and libraries of the great European
monasteries, further evidence of crucial importance still exists.
To sum up, we now know that over 22-26 June 1975, the Moon
suffered an intense bombardment of boulders; that on 30 June 1908
a 30-megaton or so impact took place in northern Siberia; and that
on 25 June 1178 an impact of energy about 100,000 megatons
appears to have taken place on the Moon, during an epoch when the
Taurid fireballs were highly active on Earth. And we now realize that
these disasters from the sky are associated with swarms of asteroidal
material which emerge from time to time out of the constellation
Taurus.
It is now abundantly clear that we are faced with a sky far removed
from the harmless one with which we have been presented by
generations of scholars. We are approaching the state where a
quantitative assessment of the hazards facing us can be attempted.
But first, armed with these new astronomical insights, let us take a
fresh look at old evidence: let us test our new model against the
ancient tales of celestial catastrophe.
12 — Ancient Echoes
Archeology, archaeoastronomy, mythology, classical history and so
on have long been studied under the assumption that the night sky
of, say, three thousand years ago was no different from the one we
see now. 89 Certainly the slow movement of the celestial pole
amongst the stars is generally recognized; also, past eclipses can be
dated by astronomers to coincide with those known from ancient
history sources. This gives a strong prima facie colour to the
comfortable view of an orderly, stable universe. Let us summarize
the astronomical evidence which reveals that this assumption can no
longer be justified.
As little as a thousand years ago, we have seen, the sky was
dominated by fireball activity emerging from the Taurus
constellation, accompanied probably by an impact which, had it been
terrestrial rather than lunar, would have made it unnecessary to
write this book. Three or four thousand years ago, the whole Taurid
complex must have been larger and more active. Orbiting within it
were active comets, celestial objects travelling along the zodiac and
easily visible to any shepherd tending his flock by night. Encke’s
Comet is dying rapidly and will become an asteroid within about 50
years; but in the century after its discovery the comet is known to
have been seen as a naked eye object about a dozen times. Even
today, if it were just a little brighter we would now have a ghostly
zodiacal traveler coming and going in the night sky in a series of
complicated cycles, as easily seen as the planets but a good deal more
perplexing.
Going into the more remote past, we enter periods of history when
the celestial fireworks from the cometary material were much more
dramatic. Even in fairly recent historical times the Taurid stream has
been active: this is evidenced, not only by the medieval observations
but also by orbital backtracking of meteors and by the fact that there
seems to be an intense meteoric core to the Taurid stream even
today, manifesting itself as a swarm (figure 6). If the meteors were
more than say 10,000 years old the stream would be unrecognizably
dispersed; easily visible cometary activity has therefore, in all
probability, been taking place throughout that period and beyond.
The disintegration history of the giant comet itself probably covers
tens of thousands of years. Alone or as part of a small number of
major comets, it probably released enough dust to initiate the last ice
age, a wintry drama par excellence which reached a peak around
20,000 years ago. Dusty streamers from the comet, lying in the plane
of the zodiac, must have been easily associated with the main comet
and its meteors.
In neolithic and early historical times, then, a string of naked-eye
comets was moving along the zodiac much like the planets, still
active debris from a hierarchy of disintegrations of the major body.
Encke’s comet could be the remnant core of the original body; or it
could be merely one of the several hundred remnant Apollo asteroids
which was re-activated for a few centuries, perhaps by a recent
collision breaking through its dusty surface. At any one time, it is
likely that there were one or a very few dominant bodies. It is
expected that there were major splitting from these from time to
time over the centuries. Some of the smaller fragments would be
transient in the extreme; others, respectable comets in their own
right, would persist for centuries of millennia. The slow evolution of
the cometary orbits ensures that, at a brief epochs in the past, the
orbital tracks of the major comet and Earth intersected (see, for
example, figure 9).close encounters with the major, active fragment,
over these centuries, must have been spectacular if not terrifying,
with the comet nucleus, brighter then Venus, crossing the sky in a
few hours, accompanied by a complex, striated red tail bisecting the
sky. Meteor storms of ferocious intensity, recurring annually when
the Earth crossed the debris of the comet, must have taken place
during these epochs, the shooting stars blazing out from a small
region of sky in Taurus or Aries. On some such occasions the sky
must have been filled with brilliant fireballs, such storms lasting for
several hours. Some of these fireballs would on occasion reach the
upper atmosphere or the ground, and there would be explosions,
there could be no doubting the association of these spectacular
phenomena with the supreme being in the sky.
Figure 9. Intersection points (nodes) of Comet Encke’s orbit
with the plane containing the Earth’ orbit, at various dates
before the present (BP). During the first millennium BC up to
the time of Chirst, the orbit of the comet or that of its associated
dust trail would have intersected that of the Earth, leading at
this time to annual fireball storms of amazing intensity.
Such close encounters with the Earth, although spectacular, would
however be rare. A comet increases rapidly in brightness as it
approaches the Sun, and a more usual manifestation of the cosmic
debris would be the regular appearance of one of the major
fragments as a spectacular object in the morning and evening sky.
As the millennia passed, the comets lost their volatile gases, their
tales diminished and the comets eventually faded from sight. It is
likely, however, that one or a few strong meteor showers remained,
repeating annually and predictably. Of these, the Taurid meteor
shower — really a complex of closely similar showers — was
undoubtedly outstanding. Throughout the year an intense zodiacal
light must have been visible, in the pre-down and post-dusk skies, as
a pillar stretching upwards from the Sun. During the night, twin
pillars would still be visible rising on each side from opposing
horizons. Patches of light, due to concentrations of debris released in
past disintegrations of the prime body, would seem to drift through
the constellations of the zodiac. As we enter the pre-Christian era,
even these signs gradually faded from sight until today, only a faint
zodiacal light and an ancient, diffuse meteor stream remain as visible
signs.
To summarize, we expect:
1. intense annual fireball activity emerging annually from the
Taurus/Aries region, this activity reaching prodigious levels on
occasion;
2. comets, with perhaps one or two dominating, regularly
tracking along the zodiacal path in the night sky, with occasional
spectacular encounters;
3. one or two comets regularly visible as a brilliant object in the
morning and evening sky; and
4. pillars, patches and streams of light in the night sky, lying
along a bright zodiac.
In table 7 we list some of the overlapping timescales of human and
astronomical interest. It makes little sense (or so it seems to us) to
try to understand the ancient traditions of celestial catastrophe while
ignoring these new results. Such matters as the Bronze Age
destructions and the traditions of crisis — the word coming to an end
through celestial fire and so on — have to be looked at anew. We have
no illusions about the problems involved in this programme: there is
a heavy intellectual investment in prevailing interpretations and
small adjustments to them will not necessarily do. Nevertheless, it
seems that the cosmic message has been handed down through the
millennia; and the experts have failed to interpret the archaic code.
Very approximate. The slowness of human development during
the ice age contrasts noticeably with the speed of cultural
evolution following its end. There is much overlap of
astronomical and cultural timescales, and indeed the zodiacal
cloud and Taurid meteors are visible even now, while Encke’s
comet is just below naked-eye visibly. In antiquity, with the
complex of debris much more active. It is likely that the prime
comet, lesser comets, and debris were regularly visible in the
zodiac, and associated with fierce annual fireball showers and
occasional impacts.
In seeking evidence of the ancient turbulent sky, we should not
necessarily expect descriptions, perhaps four or five thousand years
old, to be given in modern scientific terms. We do not seek comets
tracking along the zodiacal but gods wandering along a celestial
river; rather than evanescent patches of light we should seek
temporary celestial islands; rather than fireball swarms and a
Tunguska impact we expect celestial thunderbolts hurled in anger;
and in tales of the world’s end, we should be alert for indications that
celestial catastrophe came specifically out of the constellation Taurus
the Bull, or in more remote epochs, because of the evolution of the
meteor orbits, out of the neighbouring constellation Aries the Ram.
In interpreting ancient and frequently obscure texts dealing with the
sky, and the evolution through the ages of ideas about the universe
and its celestial gods, a proper methodological approach is required:
it is incorrect to ignore the actual astronomical environment. Many
interpretations of the gods and their adventures could be made to
seem plausible, and in these tales have been seen visitors from outer
space and planets hurtling past the Earth. This relative
indeterminacy applies equally to ‘standard’ interpretations based on
the assumption of a constant night sky: thus if these are to be upheld,
the presence of Taurid phenomena in ancient cosmic cultures,
exclusive associations with the Bull or the Ram, has to be explained.
In the final analysis, if the constraints imposed by the real
astronomical surroundings are not applied, there is little to choose
between one school of thought which sees in myth only eclipse
dragons, another which sees only alien spacemen, and yet another
which sees nothing at all.
One of the most remarkable and widespread beliefs held in early
civilizations was that of a god in the sky. 90 Even in the Nile valley,
where the Sun was eventually a principle object of worship, there was
an earlier celestial religion, older even than the dynasties of the
pharaohs. In the Pyramid Texts this early god is shown as the giver of
life, of rain, and of ‘celestial fire’. Worship of a sky god has been the
dominant religious feature of the Indo-European and Semitic
peoples from the earliest times. As these groups spread into Asia,
India and the eastern Mediterranean, they took their Supreme Being
with them.
A properly held view is that the idea of a Supreme Being developed
from the primitive animism of the savage. The story goes that, out of
the primitive belief that every tree and breath of wind was alive,
there evolved the belief in a multitude of gods, and that out of this
polytheism in turn these arose the higher belief in a single Supreme
Deity. It is a view which is still popularly held and promulgated.
However the result of anthropological researches has been to show
that the Supreme Beings of primitive cultures have always been such
and have never been 'lower-order’ gods or heroes. If anything the
evolution has been in the reverse direction, the tendency to create
gods being seen, for example, in the proliferation of saints in the
Roman Catholic faith. An interesting further finding of this research
is that, even in the earliest times, the sky god never existed alone: he
was always accompanied by other divine creatures.
Another popular misconception is that the early sky god, like the
modern conception of God, was an abstraction. More probably, he
was something physically real in the sky, and historians of religion
have usually regarded the Supreme Deity as the ‘physical sky’ itself.
Thus behind the Semitic and Indo-European belief in a celestial
Supreme Being ‘no doubt lay an earlier cult of the sky in which the
vault of heaven was deified and associated with transcendental gods
and supramundane powers who dwelt in exalted seclusion in the
celestial regions’. According to the historian James, the cult of a sky
god is very ancient, probably going back at least to the late stone age.
Nor was the original deity a mere weather god. Zeus hurling his
thunderbolts from the summit of Mount Olympus is easily seen as a
personification of thunder and lightning but there appears to have
been an older, celestial Zeus behind this creature. When the IndoEuropean tribes migrated through southern Russian and along the
Danube, some of them settled in Thessaly, near Mount Olympus,
around 2000 BC (chapter 3). They installed their gods on the
mountain, under the leadership of Zeus, and in due course Zeus
became associated with the weather. But as James points out, he
never lost his earlier, celestial connections, the very name coming
form a root div meaning ‘the bright sky’. Their adventures, too, were
firmly celestial, Zeus and his followers battling it out with Chronos
and his allies in the sky, sending them ‘migrating beyond the
horizon, heaven knows where’. An illustrative hint of an earlier
cometary Zeus is seen in the very old myth in which Zeus was hidden
by his mother Rhea from his father Chronos. Because Chronos
swallowed his offspring to prevent them dethroning him, Rhea hid
Zeus in cave. There he was suckled by a goat, and from the cavern
‘fire flashed forth annually when the blood from the birth of Zeus
streamed forth’. Given the cosmological setting of much early myth
(see chapter 13), it is difficult to make sense of this story except in
terms of an annual meteor stream; but if so, Zeus was, in this myth, a
comet. In similar vein, the thunderbolts of the deities were not
thunder or lightning. Take, for example, Zeus’s response 91 to an
imposter Salmoneus who was flinging lighted torches at the sky:
according to Apollodorus, ‘Zeus struck him with a thunderbolt, and
wiped out the city he had founded with all its inhabitants’. Some
lightning! Whatever authority one may ascribe to Apollodorus, it is
clear from many such remarks by classical writers that the
thunderbolts of Zeus were regarded as something quite out of the
ordinary.
In the earliest times then, probably going back to the Stone Age, a
Supreme Being was worshipped. This being was physically real,
celestial, it wielded thunderbolts, and was frequently accompanied
by other, lesser celestial deities whose nature we shall investigate in
due course.
In The Cosmic Serpent we proposed that some of the major celestial
deities were originally comets, derived from the break-up of the giant
progenitor. As the comets faded from sight, the tales of their
adventures, handed down as myth, gradually became meaningless to
the tellers and their listener. However the gods were plainly celestial
creatures, and at a later stage of this evolution the names of the chief
celestial deities were transferred to the planets, which then,
paradoxically, acquired the cometary characteristic of the ancient
tales. The bizarre adventures of the celestial Zeus (or Jupiter) for
example, did not therefore refer, a la Velikovsky, to the planet now of
that name, but to something else.
In fact, as noted previously, the evidence is that names like Jupiter
and Saturn were superimposed on the planets in the sky at a
relatively late period. The history of the names of the planets can
only be traced back with confidence to about 600 BC. Table 4 shows
the names which were attached to the planets from that time
onwards. Democritus (around 430 BC) did not name the planets and
even said he did not know how many there are. The attachment of
gods to planets seems to have originated with the Babylonians, who
gave two names to the planets, a ‘scientific’ one and a ‘divine’ one. It
may be no coincidence that a revolution in religious attitudes took
place from roughly 600 BC onwards. In the words of one
authority: 92
If we compare the religious attitude of the period before -700
with the period after -300, we detect a tremendous difference.
No matter whether we direct our attention to Greece, Egypt or
Asia, the differences are everywhere of the same kind. The
triumphal advance of cosmic religion and its attendant astrology
is an international phenomenon ... After 600 BC we can observe
the invasion of the Greek world by new ideas and the onset of
doubts about the traditional gods. The new ideas induced
powerful reactions, such as the condemnation of Anaxagoras for
atheism and the execution of Socrates for ‘worship of new gods’,
[see chapter 6]
The old-time religion, the Babylonian-Assyrian worship of celestial
deities, was replaced by new cults and new sets of gods to worship:
Mithraism, Zervanism, Orphism flourished in the sixth century BC,
only to be themselves supplanted by religions with distinctly
monotheistic tendencies and which tended to see the supreme god as
an abstraction.
This revolution came after a long period of stability in worship. One
might, following custom, attempt to explain it in purely human
terms. Independent cities in the Mediterranean — Phoenician,
Etruscan but above all Greek — began to move ahead in trade,
literacy, technology and democracy, and one might reasonably
speculate that the social revolution led the religious one rather than
the converse. However, it is not then clear what caused the social
revolution in the first place. If, on the other hand, the sky gods were
cometary, the universal change in religious attitudes can be simply
understood if the original sky gods had merely faded away. There is
in fact good evidence that the sky gods did indeed have cometary
characteristics. The Babylonian scholar Ilse Fuhr 93 has carried out a
study of an ancient Oriental symbol, the socalled omega symbol, and
spiral markings associated with it. This symbol is most commonly
found on stone carvings and so on dating from the first and second
centuries BC but its roots go back much further, probably into
prehistory. Unlike other ancient symbols, the appearance of the
omega symbol changes considerably from one artifact to another.
From its appearance, and its obvious celestial connections, Fuhr has
deduced that the omega symbols are representations of comets.
Plate 17. (opposite) Boundary stone invoking the gods: the
omega (comet) symbol appears along with other Babylonian
deities such as Anu and Enlil (Cliché des Musées Nationaux,
Paris).
The largest, although not the oldest, group of relics on which the
omega symbol is found are the boundary stones, used to delineate
territorial boundaries. Marked on these stones are gods, placed as
warnings to indicate that the wrath of the gods would descend on the
trespasser. There would seem to be nothing abstract or unreal about
these gods: symbols on the stones can be recognized as the disc of
the Sun and the crescent of the Moon. An example is shown in plate
17, where the omega symbol is placed next to symbols for Any, Ea
and Enlil.
Plate 18. An Assyrian cylinder seal in the British Museum. Over
a holy tree hovers the god Assur with wings and a tail. On each
side of the tree there is a king in duplicate. His right hand is
raised in a gesture of prayer and his left hand catches a ribbon,
and one may infer that a divine right to kinship, through
identification with the cometary god, is being represented
(reproduced by courtesy of the trustees of the British Museum).
Similar cometary attachments are associated with Mayan
glyphs.
This triad, representing the original great Mesopotamian gods,
corresponded at first to male and female deities associated with
Heaven (Anu) and Earth (Ea) respectively, the storm god (Enlil)
being their joint offspring. In the very earliest representations the
members of this triad were usually horned deities, but in later years
Anu took on more the character of the celestial equator whilst Ea and
Enlil came to symbolize the zones of the zodiac below and above the
equator respectively. This transformation is itself highly suggestive
in the context of comets for it reflects rather accurately the way in
which cometary dust will be disturbed in the sky as a result of orbital
precession over a millennium or so, under the perturbing influence
of Jupiter. Remarkably, such dust bands have been detected in the
sky with the aid of the infrared Astronomical Satellite IRAS.
Plate 19. A swastika is perhaps the most surprising symbol to be
found within this ancient Chinese classification scheme for
comets. The classification is one of several paintings on silk
recovered from a Han dynasty tomb dated 168 BC. Examples of
multiple tails and fine structure (striations) are also clearly
depicted (adapted from the identification chart for the
Mawangtui Comet Atlas, 1978).
The omega symbol is found also on coffin lids, presumably as
supplications to the gods, in the company of other sky gods symbols;
it is found on cylinder seals where kinship between a king on Earth
and a cometary deity seems to be represented (plate 18); and it is
found also on big limestone blocks from the Anu-Addad temple in
Assur, which can be dated to between 1200 and 1300 BC. Here it is
found in the company of the swastika. This now notorious symbol
appears again, a thousand years later, in China, 94 where it is clearly
intended to describe a comet in one of its many manifestations. The
origin of the swastika, an ancient (certainly prehistoric) symbol, has
always been regarded as mysterious. The facts to be explained are its
strange appearance and its universality, for it is found from India to
Mexico, from Scandinavia to China. Comets seen in the sky are
indeed a natural explanation for this ancient symbol, but not the
average transient ghosts one observes now: recurring close
encounters with active comets in the prehistoric sky are implied.
Fuhr’s identification of the swastika as a comet symbol, confirmed by
its Chinese representation (plate 19), are thus a significant
demonstration that such objects were indeed regular travelers in the
sky at night.
In fact, one of the impressive aspects of Fuhr’s study is her finding
that comets may be symbolized by spirals and swastikas, although it
must have seemed that these were quite unrealistic representations.
But sense can be made of these symbols when it is realized that gas is
emitted from a comet nucleus in jets. The gas, spiraling outwards
from the rotating nucleus, eventually merges into the surrounding
coma and is swept backwards to form the tail. But the spiral form
cannot normally be seen without a telescope. For the jets to have
been visible to the naked eye there must have been close encounters
with bright, active comets. The cup-and-ring markings often found
on prehistoric megaliths often have a cometary appearance, 95 and
spirals, swastikas and even what appear to be tail striations are to be
found amongst them (plate 20). The spiral motif is particularly
common in Minoan and Mycenean pottery and frescoes (plate 21).
The omega symbol was not confined to Babylon. Fuhr has identified
a ‘Heracles knot’, and intertwining of omegas sometimes shown as
serpents, in many artefacts throughout the near East and seen, for
example, in the columned room of the tomb of Ramasses in Thebes.
The omega was attached as a sort of label to various Egyptian gods,
such as Meschenet and Osiris, for example in a temple of Osiris in
Abydos dated around 1200-1300 BC (plate 22); and it conspicuously
represents the goddess Hathor through her coiffure (figure 10).
Hathor, who was sometimes equated with the body of the sky
goddess Nut, was often represented as a cow (plate 5).
Plate 20. Nucleus, tail and striations? Possible third millennium
cometary motif on the so-called Panorama Stone, Ilkley. Note
that the upper ring appears to be a spiral; a megalithic swastika
is also found at this locality (photo: Michael J. Stead).
It was Hathor who overthrew the earlier supreme god Atum after a
widespread massacre, Atum having grown old and weak. One of the
chief Egyptian deities, she was identified with the Greek goddess of
love. Aphrodite, in her earliest forms as the Assyrian Ishtar or the
Sumerian Innana, was rather more warlike than her Hellenized
version. A Sumerian hymn to Innana 96 gives the flavor:
My father gave me the heavens, gave me the earth.
I am Innana.
Kingship he gave me,
queenship he gave me,
waging of battle he gave me, the attack he gave me,
the floodstorm he gave me, the hurricane he gave me.
The heavens he set as a crown on my head,
the earth he set as sandals on my feet,
a holy robe he set around my body,
a holy scepter he set in my hand.
The gods are sparrows — I am a falcon;
The Annunki trundle along — I am a splendid wild cow;
I am father Enlil’s splendid wild cow,
his splendid wild cow leading the way!
The pure torch that flares in the sky,
the heavenly light,
shining bright like the day,
the great queen of heaven Innana,
I will hail.
The holy one, the awesome queen of the Annunaki,
the one revered in heaven and earth,
crowned with great horns, ...
Plate 21. Double spiral and omega motifs in Minoan pottery
(photo by permission of Princeton Univerisity Press). The spiral,
the swastika and the omega are found in numerous cultures
going back to 2000 BC at least, and may be represented of
comets, now defunct, which belonged to the Taurid swarm.
Figure 10. The sky goddess Hathor (line drawing from Ein
Altorientalisches Symbol by Ilse Fuhr). Associated with the
zodiac in ancient Egypt, she is here shown with the distinctive
coiffure representing her as a comet. From he Temple of Hathor
at Dendera. Such depictions of Hathor sate back to at least 1400
BC.
Plate 22. Deities represented as comets in ancient Egypt: a) Isis
and Osiris (defaced by a later pharaoh), as depicted in the
Temple of Osiris (defaced by a later pharaoh), as depicted in the
Temple of Osiris at Abydos. Fuhr’s ‘ancient cometary symbol’
appears here as the curious twin spiral headgear; (b) The
goddess Meschenet, likewise associated with the comet symbol
(see Ilse Fuhr, Ein Altorientalisehes Symbol). The worship of
specific gods as comets implies regular recurrence in the sky,
consistently with the astronomical evidence for the hierarchic
disintegration of a giant progenitor comet into a family of lesser
comets during the earliest historical times.
Innana is usually interpreted by scholars as the planet Venus, and in
the absence of the new astronomical information this is no doubt the
best that one could have done. However it seems that the settled,
spectacular, celestial imagery of the goddess Innana, a morning and
evening object ‘crowned with great horns’ and associated with the
omega symbolism of Hathor, is more compatible with the thesis that
the goddess was a great comet in a short-period orbit.
We need not to go further here. The idea that much imagery in the
Neolithic and bronze ages is cometary (omega symbols, spirals,
cosmic serpents and bulls) is relatively new. Likewise rituals and
cults throughout the Near East, in particular the ubiquitous fire-bull
rituals of the second millennium BC, have recently been seen as
inspired by fireball activity from the Taurus constellation quite
independently of the astronomical discoveries mentioned herein. 97
The three main astronomical legacies from those distant times are
celestial myths, calendars with their associated festivals, and
megalithic alignments. The field is vast, the attitudes adopted in the
face of these legacies are often very rigid and one may well have to
wait for the present scholarly generation to die off before a serious
re-appraisal of all this material is undertaken in depth. All we shall
try to do here is take a cursory look at one of those legacies, and see
whether it is better understood from a different point of view: let us
take a new look at the old stories.
13 — World Ends
In a pre-literate culture, would such information as the apocalyptic
experience of a Tunguska impact be handed down through the
generations? The problem, of course, with word-of-mouth communication
is that as information is disseminated in space and time, it is likely to
become garbled with repetition. In addition, if the information is complex,
it becomes difficult to remember. Had twentieth-century communication
and transport not been available, it may well be that the Tunguska event
would have been obliterated from human memory within a few
generations.
And yet, on the other hand, some system for the verbal spread of
information, even of a technical nature, must have existed in antiquity: the
megalith builders were able to secure stable funding for the various
expensive phases of Stonehenge over long periods of time, in addition to
aligning their structures on astronomically significant points, without
benefit of written memoranda, minutes of meetings and the like. There is
evidence that the Indus, Iberian and other traders in pre-history used
astronomy to navigate, some reaching possibly as far away as China and
Indonesia. The Phoenicians appear to have rounded the Cape of Good
Hope, and the Polynesians populated the islands of the Pacific around
1500-1000 BC. All this required a knowledge of the sky, and a degree of
reliability in the transmission of technical information over long periods of
time. 98
Some indication of how this was probably achieved comes from the
Polynesian navigators of recent times. They had the ability to sail
sometimes hundreds of miles without sight of land, and yet find the
smallest islands. They did this in part through the reading of ocean wave
patterns, and in part through observations of rising and setting stars. The
stellar information was given in the form of a fictitious narrative, an
explanatory myth, easy to learn and apply. The Phaenomena, written by
the Greek Aratus (c. 315-250 BC), comprises star and constellation lore
written in poetic form, and may have its roots in the practical knowledge of
mariners of the day. It is likely that the constellations themselves, many of
which bear little resemblance to the things they are named after, were
created out of ancient and universally familiar stories. Information may
often have been transmitted, then, in the form of stories, or myth as we
would now call it.
Much insight into the nature of these ancient tales has come from studies
such as those by de Santillana, von Dechend 99 and others. These studies
represent a great advance over earlier interpretations of ancient tales as
fertility rites or whatever, or even as the idle fancies of primitive minds.
They confirm the very old suspicion that the myths had a celestial setting;
they were ‘vehicles for memorizing and transmitting certain kinds of
astronomical and cosmological information’. That is, they account to prescientific descriptions of astronomical phenomena. The tales were already
ancient by the time they were written down. Encke’s Comet, its
companions and the associated fireball swarms should indeed loom large
in the stories.
There is a preoccupation in myth with long cycles of time. This can be seen
in Indian myth especially, world ages periodically coming to an end in
celestial catastrophe. They tell us of people who are ‘unmistakably
identified, yet elusively fluid in outline. They tell of gigantic figures and
superhuman events which seem to occupy the whole living space between
heaven and earth’. This tendency to describe gods as people extended to
sky phenomena generally, geographical features often being placed in the
sky. The ‘rivers’ Oceanus and Eridanus of Greek mythology were conceived
in heaven before their transfer to earth. Conversely, ‘there are many events,
described with appropriate terrestrial imagery, that do not, however,
happen on earth’. (The ‘earth’ in myth is the zodiac, ‘dry land’ being the
band of zodiac north of the celestial equator, the ‘underworld’ or ‘waters
below’ being the southern half). The inhabitants of this celestial earth are
the assorted travelers on the zodiac.
Arising out of her 20-year study of myth, von Dechend made the claim that
the ancient tales were describing a slow celestial movement, known as the
precession of the equinoxes, several thousand years before its ‘official’
discovery by Hipparchus in 127 BC. The rotation axis of the Earth is not
fixed eternally with respect to the stars: the axis rotates slowly, like the
wobble of a spinning top, with a period of 26,000 years. The result is that
the celestial pole describes a small circle around the sky with this period, as
measured against the fixed background of the stars or the ecliptic, the
plane of motion of the Earth. The latter is traced out in the sky by the band
of zodiacal constellations along which the Sun, Moon, planets and Encke
Comet debris move. The pole star of 4,600 years ago for example, a time of
much pyramid and megalith building, was Alpha Draconis. This slow
wobble causes the equinoxes, marking the intersections of the celestial
equator and ecliptic, to drift slowly westwards through the zodiacal
constellations at a rate just perceptible within a human lifetime. During the
whole of human history, the vernal equinox has passed through only four
of the twelve constellations of the zodiac. The vernal equinox is a calendar
market, the entry of the Sun into it signaling the onset of summer. Slow
though it is, precession can be detected within a human lifetime by a slight,
progressive shift in the rising point of a star: in the words of one
commentator, all one needs is an old tree and belief in the veracity of one’s
grandfather.
It was also claimed by von Dechend that great astrological significance was
attached to precession, the grandest and slowest of celestial movements: it
was a great cycle which determined the course of human destiny. Thus
there was a Golden Age, from about 6000 to 4000 BC, when the equinox
coincided with the Milky Way (being then in Germini and Sagittarius). This
world age came to an end with a great catastrophe. The Phaethon story in
which the sun-chariot fell from the sky, setting the world alight describes
the end of this age. There followed the Silver Age (4000-2500 BC) with the
vernal equinox in Taurus, terminated again by catastrophe described for
example in a myth wherein Zeus, during an argument, tilted up a table,
causing the Flood of Deucalion. The cosmic myths then, according to von
Dechend, have the motifs:
1. Affairs on Earth are controlled by a series of world ages, each of
several thousand years’ duration.
2. Each world age is controlled and terminated by the passage of the
spring equinox from one constellation to another.
3. The opening and closing of these ages is marked by a great
catastrophe, in the form of worldwide fire or deluge or both.
It is, of course, catastrophe which catches the eye.
We do not, for our purposes, need to undertake a full critical analysis of the
claim that the precession of the equinoxes is being described in these
stories. In fact, the orbits of comets and their meteor streams precess at
rates which are comparable to those of the equinoxes, with radiants that
are very directly seen: thus, if the catastrophe that catches the eye has
anything to do with their precession, the world ages may well have to be
redefined. But for the present, the catastrophe itself is our concern. De
Santillana and von Dechend, of course, interpret the catastrophe stories as
allegory, a mere vivid way of describing the end of a world age. A few
scholars have taken the view that some extraordinary celestial event or
events, causing worldwide consternation, is being described in these tales,
but for the most part the idea of literal catastrophe has been seen as the
hunting ground of the crackpot.
Many other attempts have been made to interpret these stories in
allegorical form. One current fashion, for example, is to suppose they
represent eclipses of Moon and Sun. On this interpretation the combat is
just the chaos in Heaven caused by the eclipse. Indeed Chinese and other
myths do describe eclipses in terms of dragons swallowing Sun or Moon,
and the term draconic, applied to a lunar month connected with the eclipse
cycle, reflects this old notion. Some have supposed that the conflict
describes the passage of the seasons, some have taken them to represent
nothing more than the cycle of day and night, and others have even seen no
astronomical content in them, the stories referring to say, the clash of
religious, somehow transferred to the sky. The very variety of explanations
indicates that none is completely satisfactory, that a key factor is missing.
One has then the ‘allegorical’ interpretations of the academics and the
‘literal’ interpretations of the crackpots. We prefer the latter: the myths are
not hiding truth under layers of allegory, they are to be read simply, more
or less at face value. Of course the ancient tales may carry allegorical, moral
and many other messages, but themes like the creation myths, for example,
though coming to us in a variety of clothings, often have a basis so similar
that one might reasonably suppose thay did indeed start as accounts of outof-the-ordinary events which were independently observed
worldwide — for the stories were told in the Old World and the New. What
we must do, clearly, is take a more detailed look at the surviving accounts
of celestial catastrophe: plate 23, for example, illustrates a seventeenthcentury example of an event in 1667 evidently overlaid with a degree of
allegorical interpretation. We must see how they fit the expectations we
now have from the new astronomical knowledge.
Plate 23. Medieval bolide fall. Seventeenth-century illustration of a
swarm of fireballs: stray missies, so it was believed, resulting from a
clash of celestial armies, an idea whose origins may be traced back
several thousand years. Note the central presence of a black orb
representing the forces of evil (from The Signs of Heaven by M.
Bischoff).
Specifically, we seek descriptions relating to fireball swarms or Tunguskalike impacts, associated with one or more cometary gods. Zodiacal
elements might be sought in the tales: descriptions of disaster coming out
of the constellation Taurus would be particularly significant. Finally, such
elements should be recorded in myths worldwide.
Certain patterns do indeed appear worldwide in these stories:
1. There was once a supreme sky god; this god often constructed
heaven and earth.
2. Later, the ‘world’ was peopled with giants in the sky.
3. There was a combat involving two major participants, god and
dragon, two dragons, or whatever. Often, the outcome of the battle was
fire and flood on the Earth below.
4. The major participants were frequently accompanied by hordes of
lesser creatures, such as the Annunaki in Babylonian myths.
5. The combat took place in the sky.
6. It was recurrent.
7. The combatants were celestial creatures, giants, noisy, chaotic,
winged, serpent-like and they spanned the skies. They might crash to
the ground in flames (one curious combatant is the roaring snake
which disappears into the ground). The lesser actors often resemble
the principals.
We consider that giants are comets, major splittings from the original
progenitor; the hordes are lesser debris; from time to time their orbits
bring them into real or apparent conflict with each other and with the real
world on the ground; while the world they build is the dust they shed, a
battery of luminous rings and orbital tracers. This is not of course to
exclude elements of the other propositions which may in part be later
additions constructed to give meaning to the tales when orbital evolution
was carrying the participants out of harm’s way or degassing was losing
them altogether: by the time the Greeks recorded the tales, their original
meaning may have been completely lost.
In The Cosmic Serpent, we pointed out that there is a striking resemblance
between the Tunguska impact, a medieval account of a stony meteorite
swarm which fell in what is now the USSR (as recorded by a local
chronicler) and the two battles of the gods as described by Hesiod in his
Theogony. The latter, written about 800 BC, describes tales of vastly
greater antiquity.
The medieval account, the oldest one of which we are aware, has been
quoted by the Russian astronomer Krinov: ‘there appeared over the town a
dark cloud, and it was dark as the night ... lightning kept flashing
ceaselessly ... Even the ground seemed to shake and sway continuously ...
clouds of fire arose and collided with one another, great heat coming from
the lightning and thunder’. In table 8 we have listed the main features of
the 1908 and 1296 impact events. There is very good agreement between
these independent accounts of the two impacts; this gives one confidence
that, should these features appear in mythical accounts, we are dealing
with a real impact event, whatever the poetic trappings and
misunderstandings of later interpreters.
Hesiod’s Theogony contains a story, probably derived from Babylon or
Sumer, that is typical of the combat myths. This is the tale of conflict in
heaven between Chronos, aided by the so-called Titans, against Zeus and
his five brothers and sisters. These were all children of Mother Earth and
Father Heaven. Although represented as living beings by the Greeks, they
were monsters of overwhelming strength. The description of the battle is
nothing if not ferocious, for example:
Then Zeus no longer held back his ferocity but now immediately his
mind was filled with fury and he showed forth all his strength; at the
same time, continually hurling his lightning, he came from heaven and
Olympus. Thick and fast, the thunderbolts, with thunder and lightning
(note the distinction!), flew from his stout hand and they made a holy
flame roll along, as they came in quick succession. The lifegiving earth
blazed and crashed all around, and all around immense woods
crackled loudly in the fire. The whole land. Ocean’s streams, and the
unfruitful sea seethed; the hot blast surrounded the earthborn Titans
and an immense flame reached the shining upper air. The gleaming
brilliance of the thunderbolt and lightning blinded their eyes, strong
though they were. An awful heat seized Chaos ...
and so on.
Later there was another attempt to defeat Zeus, when the Earth gave birth
to Typhon, a flaming, winged monster whose head reached the stars, who
had a hundred serpents’ heads in place of fingers, who was nothing but
vipers from the waist down, and whose eyes flashed fire. Typhon was
destroyed by Zeus’s thunderbolts and fell aflame to the ground. Typhon is
explicitly recognized as a comet in classical and early medieval times, being
described as such by the astrologer Lydus (AD 490-565), by Plutarch and
by Pliny 100 who, 800 years after Hesiod, describes a comet called Typhon
having ‘spiral-like, glowing red knots’. The spiral motif, as we have seen,
could only have been connected with a comet if it were an extraordinary
body.
The main features of these bodies are also listed in table 8; it is difficult to
avoid the conclusion that Hesiod is describing a very large, Tunguska-like
impact, large enough to flatten forests. Seasonal or eclipse interpretations
do seem a little inadequate, if not silly. But more than this, the impact is
clearly associated with its celestial source. The fiery, snake-like monsters in
the sky, each with its host of supporters, the recurrence of the cosmic war,
the impact motifs, all strongly suggest that our distant ancestors are telling
us, through Hesiod, about the very events we seek.
The celestial and cometary imagery are seen quite clearly in other classical
authors, as for example in the Dionysiaka of Nonnos, written around AD
500. According to Nonnos, 101 the battle began when Zeus hid his celestial
weapons in a grotto and they were stolen by Typhoeus. In the course of
battle the monster ‘lashes the back of the hail-spewing Goat’ (sic), disturbs
the constellations and devastates the earth, and ‘uproots trees and forests
and rolls them along in front of him’. After the first battle:
night came upon the earth and Helios guided the storm-tossed chariot
into the undamaged Atlantic Gates. All the gods wandered fleetingly
along the banks of the Nile ... Only Zeus still lingered in the high
constellation of the Bull. As if driven by the storm, countless leaping
stars flashed through the upper atmosphere and, all around, lightning
flashes cut the heavens. A comet spread its disheveled light.
But then, in the morning, Typhoeus ‘rose in the shape of a human,
encircled the earth with his arms that were a thousand snakes and from his
countless heads resounded the howling of wolves, the roaring of lions’ etc.
After a long and terrible struggle, Zeus’s celestial thunderbolts’ smash the
crown of the speckled dragon’s head, the coiled comet scatters the hair on
the head of Typhoneus ... and the giant ... now finally plunges to Earth’. The
account given by Nonnos, then, although written over a millennium later
than Hesiod, contains many elements not in the earlier authors. Certainly,
as before, the event is firmly placed in the heavens. But now we have an
explicit description of:
1. a fireball swarm, associated with
2. an impact event,
3. emerging from the constellation Taurus, and
4. associated with a large ‘coiled’ comet.
The statement that the celestial gods wandered fleetingly along the banks
of the Nile (only Zeus lingering in the Bull) is of course incomprehensible
in terms of terrestrial imagery. However as we have seen the ancient rivers
were often cosmic, and the Egyptians connected the Nile and the sky in a
very specific way. In this system, discovered early this century by Georges
Daressy, the Egyptians mapped the Nile on to the zodiac. Nonnos, it
appears, is describing the celestial Nile, thus:
5. the gods were wandering along the zodiac.
Zeus, the hurler of the thunderbolts, lingered in the constellation of the
Bull: one could hardly expect a more explicit description of a fireball swarm
emerging from Taurus! A Taurius connection seems to be unique to the
catastrophist hypothesis we are proposing (for example it has no eclipse
significance), and we shall therefore examine it in more detail.
The orbit of Encke’s Comet and its associated material evolves slowly
because of the cumulative gravitational disturbances of Jupiter and Saturn.
As a result of this precession, the radiant of the Taurid meteors drifts
slowly over the millennia, eastwards along the zodiac. Up to two or three
thousand years ago the radiant of the southern Taurids was straddling the
constellations of Taurus and Aries and Ram; prior to that the meteors were
emerging from the Ram. Since we are in almost complete ignorance of the
detailed structure of the complex of debris, we can hardly be more precise
than say that myths of catastrophe, if based on the giant comet debris,
should be based on the Taurid-Arietid region of sky.
The Taured-Arietid connection is to be found worldwide in the tales of
catastrophe, as expected if a universal phenomenon was being observed.
For example it is found, in much diluted form, in the Bible (Judges 15):
And he found a new jawbone of an ass, and put forth his hand and
took it, and slew a thousand men therewith. And Samson said, with
the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps, with the jaw of an ass have I
slain a thousand men ... And he was sore athirst, and called on the
Lord, and said. Thou hast given this great deliverance into the hand of
thy servant: and how shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the
uncircumcised? But God clave an hollow place that was in the jaw, and
there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit came
again, and he revived ... And he judged Israel in the days of the
Philistines twenty years.
The jawbone of the ass is in the sky: as pointed out by de Santillana and
von Dechend, it was the name given by the Babylonians to the Hyades, a
bright jawbone-shaped cluster of stars in the constellation Taurus (modern
Amazonian Indians call it the jawbone of the ox). In the Babylonian
creation epic, older than the sources discussed here, Marduk used the
Hyades as weapon against the celestial monsters. The Samson story, it
seems, is a pale survival, the chaos emerging from Taurus reduced to a
bizarre fight on earth, the flood connection (p. 181) reduced to a quenching
of thirst. The association of the celestial conflict with the Taurus
constellation is therefore very old.
In Chinese myth, the world was created by the cosmic serpent NuKua. No
sooner was this idyllic world created than the demon king Kung Kung ‘rose
at the head of a multitude of dragons from the dark waters of the
primordial abyss that encircled earth’. After a chaotic battle in which earth
and heaven were upset, Kung Kung was defeated and abdicated in favour of
his son. His son, Yu Shih, was at times benevolent, at times very
destructive; when he appeared on earth with scales of yellow armour and a
blue straw hat, accompanied by a one-legged bird, he brought rain; and his
throne was in the Hyades. Records show that sacrifices were made to these
deities at least as far back as 1100 BC.
In Celtic myth, the monster Gargantua was born from his mother’s mouth
in the form of the long eel. In this form he corresponds to another Celtic
monster called the Tarasque. This latter creature is still celebrated in
Tarascon, in the French Pyrenees, in two festivals, according to the
anthropologist Huxley, 102 ‘one a sober Church festival ... the other a
boisterous occasion when young men splash the girls with water and the
monster is wheeled about the town, clashing his toothy jaws at the
spectators while his great eyes stare lugubriously’. Variants of this festival
survive to the present day throughout the Celtic world. Its significance here
is not just the water connection which appears again here: at the same
place, but much earlier, Heracles defeated a monster called Tauriscus or
Tarusco. In Celtic myth, then, the monster which Heracleds fought was a
bull. The legend is recorded by the geographer Strabo in the century before
Christ but is presumably much older again. The same basic story of
celestial catastrophe, then, seems to have been told worldwide, and is at
least as old as the second millennium BC.
Grotesque though the birth of Gargantua is, it is paralleled by that of the
cosmic serpent Ptah, creator of the earth, who emerged from the mouth of
the remote primal Egyptian deity Amen-Khnum. The latter is depicted as a
ram-god, and if these tales have any meaning at all, it is at least possible
that an earlier emergence of material from the constellation Aries (the
Ram) is being described. Zeus is often connected with a ram by the Greek
storytellers, as in the combat story where Zeus, pursued by Typhon to the
Nile, took the guise of a ram.
It is not to be supposed that the classical authors understood the ultimate
origin of the material they were handling. This can be seen, for example, in
the decline of Zeus into a mere weather god. Hesiod attempted to give a
volcanic flavor to Typhon by having him plunge to Earth under Mount
Etna, but the older versions, we know from the oriental sources, have
neither weather nor volcanic connections. It is all the more satisfactory,
then, that every element one might expect from the astronomical
framework has survived the preconceptions of the classical storytellers.
Our distant ancestors, it seems, have been telling us in simple language
that celestial catastrophe has struck, probably more than once, but the
message has been lost through the ravages of time.
Whatever happened was probably experienced over a wide area. Hesiod
and Nonnos are far from being original or even principal sources of myth.
The Greeks united much local myth which had developed in local
communities, but we have seen that the combat myth itself is very much
older than Hesiod and occurs over much of the Old World, from
Scandinavia to India and China. The conflict between the dragon pair may
also be traced back in time to Babylonian myth (Tiamat v Apsu and then
Marduk); Indian (Indra v Vitra and then Danu); and so on.
Elements of the theme appear in the Bible in the miraculous destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah and the surrounding plain by the raining down of
fire from heaven. The story may also be recognized in the Book of
Revelation as the battle between Michael and Satan ‘the dragon, the
primeval serpent’. These terrestrial catastrophe of cosmic origin are
discussed in The Cosmic Serpent and are only mentioned in passing here
(see table 9).
The recurrence of the combat in these stories is interesting: the villains
have to be disposed of not once but twice. This could possibly refer to a
twin encounter with debris. In figure 9 are shown the nodes of the orbit of
Encke’s Comet, that is, the two intersections of the comet orbit with the
ecliptic plane. Extremely close encounters with the comet are only possible
when the nodes intersect the Earth’s orbit. For Encke’s Comet these
intersections occurred around 200 BC and 600 BC, and again around 3900
BC and 3700 BC. As we have seen, if Encke’s Comet was active at any of
these dates, the intersection would produce the most spectacular celestial
phenomena. However, even between nodal intersections fierce annual
meteor storms are expected, with peaks in activity recurring at intervals of
about fifty years. The dates should not be taken too literally since the
encounters may have taken place, not with Encke’s Comet, but with a larger
progenitor of which Encke is a fragment.
The point to note is that the encounter epochs occur in pairs, separated by
a few centuries, that is, within the lifetime of these orally transmitted tales.
The persistence of these stories is as remarkable as their universality:
Nonnos is AD 500, Hesiod before 700 BC and the Marduk-Tiamat conflict
goes back perhaps to 1500 BC or even earlier. They are in fact recognizably
the same basic story. Either the astronomical phenomena recurred over
long periods or the verbal transmission of the information was sufficiently
robust that the same basic story remained recognizable over timescales of
order a millennium. Clearly, the stories were of fundamental importance.
Taken together, they amount to a description of perhaps two principal
comets in the sky, evidently associated with fireballs, storms and recurring
impacts, some of which seem to have been in the Tunguska class.
Other ancient myth systems, although less well known in the western world
than the Greek tales, seem to carry similar celestial messages in different
poetical clothing. This can be seen for example in Indian mythology, which
is old and complex and formed from a mingling of cultures. Around 2000
BC Aryan-speaking tribes came over the northwest frontier of India from
the region of Iran, and settled in the Punjab. The gods they brought with
them were already very old and widely disturbed, probably going back to
the Stone Age. Dealing as we are with gods over four thousand years old we
should expect the earliest myths relating to that distant period to include
tales of the short-period comets and their celestial debris. The period from
these first settlements in the Punjab until about 800-700 BC is referred to
as the Vedic Age, during which the Vedas, hymns to the deities, were
composed. Other cosmologies, the Hindu, Buddhist and Jain, then arose,
but it is especially to the ancient Vedas, with their chants, songs and epic
tales, that we should look for evidence of an active sky.
There is evidence in the texts for the existence of gods even older than the
Vedic period. 103 These were the Adityas or ‘celestials’ and included DyausPitar representing the primeval heavens. However worship of these
celestials was already decaying in the earliest Vedic period, and in the later
Vedic texts Indra boasts that he has dethroned Varuna, an early great rival
of Indra who represents in some way the orderliness of heaven, the regular
movement of sun, stars and so on. We therefore have an early orderversus-chaos theme. Indra, the principal Aryan (now called IndoEuropean) deity was a hammer god like Thor of northern Europe, Zeus of
southern Europe, Ptah of Egypt, P’an Ku of China and Finn-mac-Coul of
Scotland. Indra fought the dragon Vritra in a tale very similar to the
Grecian Zeus-Typhon conflict, one difference being that, whereas Typhon
was buried under Mount Etna in accordance with poetic preconceptions,
Vritra was ‘earned to the darksome deeps of Ocean’. Various groups of
demons existed, similar to the gods and often associated with them, and
indeed gods and demons changed places over the Vedic period. It is not
clear whether the demon groups were different celestial phenomena or
different tribal concepts of the same one.
There were the Nagas, serpents from the waist down, whose king Shesha is
identical to Typhon. There were the ‘ugly Vartikas of dreadful sight, having
one wing, one eye and one leg’. These were used in divination: when they
‘vomit blood, facing the sun’ this was regarded as an evil omen. It is
difficult to see how non-existent objects, mere poetic fancies, could be used
as omens, and it seems more likely that the Vartikas were real objects,
cometary in nature, the tails streaming away from the Sun and their nuclei
facing it. Imagery consistent with the astronomical expectations is seen
again, for example, in the Titan-like Daityas, who resided in a moving city
Hiranyapura: ‘sometimes it sinks below the sea, or under earth; at other
times it soars across the heavens like the sun’. The chief deities, Indra and
Varuna, have similar celestial cities, idyllic places like Plato’s Atlantis
before the fall, or the Golden Age, or Nu Kua’s world before the demons
came. One might seek to dismiss these sky-crossing cities as the products
of lurid imaginations, just as Victorians dismissed myth as the fancies of
primitive minds. But again, if myth is a carrier of cosmic information, they
are more consistently understood as real things in the sky.
The slow movement of the equinoxes through the constellations, and the
long evolution of the cometary gods, were the two grand phenomena of the
ancient skies. The world ages were each ended, it is claimed, by the passage
of the equinoxes from one constellation to another. Whether the precession
of the equinoxes was in fact known in remote antiquity is a debatable
question: between noticing the slow shift of the rising point of a star
against an old tree, and inferring a polar wobble, there is a large theoretical
leap. But if we assume with de Santillana and von Dechend that some
village Einstein took that leap, why should the ancients have described the
world ages as ending in catastrophe? Should not the traditions of cosmic
swarm be separate from those of equinoctial passage?
The sky has thrown up an interesting coincidence here. The radiants of the
Taurids, that is the point on the celestial sphere from which the fireballs
seem to come, also moves slowly across the sky, in the opposite direction to
the equinox and at a slower rate. The start of the mythic Bronze Age saw
the spring equinox passing from Taurus into Aries around 2500 BC, but for
the next millennium it also saw the Taurid stream gradually shifting from
Aries into Taurus. The constellations themselves for the most part were
probably only created around 2600 BC. The Taurids therefore came from
out of the spring equinox around the time of the constellation markers. It
would be natural, at that time, to link the two great phenomena, the marker
ending the world age and the one bringing catastrophe. There is scope here
for further study.
The unraveling of the ancient picture will indeed continue to be a complex
business, to be approached warily. The point to be made, of course, is that
we cannot, as so many mythologists have done (see note 89), try to
understand these ancient sky stories while ignoring the state of the sky as it
actually was (see table 10). In particular, it is difficult to avoid the signals of
catastrophe which were attached to the Taurus and Aries constellations in
the remote past.
A comprehensible analysis of the other ancient astronomical legacies, in
particular the calendar and alignments, will likewise be a long and complex
business, and is not attempted here. Some indication of the way such an
analysis might develop can be given, however, by the following example. At
present the Taurid meteors appear at night in middle and late November.
Allowing for their slow orbital evolution, and for the precession of the
equinoxes, one finds that going back in time they appeared about one week
earlier per millennium, assuming that they derived mainly form Encke’s
Comet. In 1000 BC for instance, they appeared in late October/early
November, the radiant reaching the meridian at midnight. Again, no great
precision can be given since the structure of the Taurid stream is almost
unknown. Nevertheless the annual appearance of the meteor stream
blazing forth from the sky would make an unmistakable annual event, and
one might seek evidence of an annual rite at this date, or even a calendar
marker, with fireball overtones.
The natural dividing points of the year would of course be the summer and
winter solstices, with the spring and autumn equinoxes midway between
them, and there is indeed an abundance of festivals to celebrate these
markers. There is also evidence of megalithic alignment towards points on
the horizon indicating that a solar calendar was used in neolithic Europe.
Curiously, however, later European tribes seem to have divided their year
quite differently, this in spite of the fact that, at more northern latitudes,
the contrast between summer and winter is more striking than say at
Mediterranean latitudes. Thus the Celts who arrived in Britain from central
Europe between 1000-800 BC began their new year with the Sambain. This
was one of the four quarters days with which the Celtic immigrants divided
up their year (they are still celebrated in Celtic hinterlands such as the
Scottish Borders). It fell on 1 November, the date of the Taurids around
1000 BC, was celebrated as a fire festival, and was known as a time when
the gods drew near to the earth and the souls of the dead were abroad.
Every fire was extinguished until the Pleiades, a conspicuous little star
cluster in Taurus, had passed the meridian, at which point new fires were
lit and carried by runners to every village. The festival survives as
Hallowe’en (see chapter 2) although the bonfires were later transferred to
5, November.
It has been claimed that this calendar has a pastoral basis, marking off the
beginning of lambing, the abundance of grass, the exchanging of sheep and
cattle at fairs and the slaughter of livestock before winter. Unfortunately for
this point of view, as pointed out by Whitlock, 104 pastoral economies came
before agricultural ones, whereas the ‘pastoral’ calendar of the Celts, if such
it was, seems to have come after the agricultural calendar. In discussing
these ancient calendars, Whitlock also remarks: ‘One other small fact
slightly worries the author, who was born and bred to agriculture. No
farmer that he has ever met has needed a calendar to tell him when to sow
and when to reap. Farmers know instinctively and by observation. Why
then should so much importance be attached to dates and calendars? Why
indeed, unless the calendar was ritualistic and concerned with the rich
variety of Taurid phenomena?
The Chinese still celebrate a Feast of the Dead in November by lighting
bonfires and sailing paper boats carrying lighted candles; and at this time
in China too, the dead cross the sea to their eternal abode; in Japan, the
Feast of Lanterns is celebrated in October and November; and so on. The
returning of the souls of the dead to their homes is very like the Platonic
conception of souls carried heaven-wards by meteors, and it seems very
unlikely that festivals so similar, celebrated worldwide at the same time of
year, should have arisen by coincidence. And yet the October/November
period has no particular seasonal significance. The festival is as universal,
and as old, as the swastika and the tales of celestial catastrophe. If the
onset of the Taurid meteor shower was the signal for the start of the New
Year, it must have been impressive indeed.
There were two Aztec calendars, a ritualistic one of 260 days and a solar
calendar. The origin of the former has never been explained. The least
common multiple of 260 and 365 days is 18,980 days or 52 years, and it
may be significant too that the 52-year cycle which terminated the Aztec
calendars ended in November. 105 At this time there was a festival lasting
for 12 days. These acted as 12 leap-days, keeping the calendar adjusted to
the seasons. On the midnight of the last day, when the brightest star in
Taurus passed overhead (Aldebaran, known to the Aztecs as the star of the
fire-making), there was a human sacrifice. All fires were extinguished and
then re-lit by torches carrying sacred fire from the temples: the parallel
with the Celtic and Asiatic customs is extraordinary. The sacrifices, and
other aspects of these festivals, had to do with propitiation and fear, and it
seems clear that the source of this fear was the cataract of fire. The
alternative is to suppose that these midnight celebrations took place with
the Taurids raining overhead unnoticed by priests and faithful alike!
For that matter, certain aspects of Quetzalcoatl, the feathered serpent who
represented planet Venus, have a distinctly cometary flavor (plate 24): this
is particularly true of its representations in the remote pre-Toltec period.
Tales relating to Encke’s Comet, like Venus a brilliant morning and evening
object, were probably, in the New World as in the Old, eventually
transferred to the planet.
The preoccupation with the calendar and cycles of time which characterizes
Old World societies, the fear of celestial gods which might bring the world
to an end if not propitiated, the meticulous observation of the sky, the
dominance of theocracy and astronomer-priests, all have their analogies in
the ancient civilizations of the west, and all have their internal ‘sociological’
explanations. In our view, however, the pace was ultimately forced by an
external, astronomical trigger.
Of course, one would like to have explicit astronomical records. These are
sparse in the extreme. Old Babylonian astronomy of the second millennium
BC has left us one astrological and one astronomical text. The astronomical
text is the Venus Tablets of Ammizaduga. This is apparently a record of
positions of the planet Venus, described as the ‘Bright Queen of the Sky’.
The Babylonian Venus was therefore the planet as long ago as 1600-1700
BC. This need not be a difficulty for a purely cometary hypothesis since
Innana, ‘crowned with great horns’, would be a brilliant morning and
evening star both in her planetary aspect as Venus and in her divine aspect
as the giant comet (cf. plate 9 (b)): evidence for such duality exists in the
dual naming of planets by the Babylonians (table 4).
Plate 24. Crowned with great horns? (cf. plate 9(b)); photo by
permission of the Museum fur Volkerkunde, Berlin.) The feathered
serpent Quetzalcoatl on a pre-Toltec stele. The deity symbolizes Venus,
as does the disc below. However this depiction, and others, has an
obvious cometary flavor, as do catastrophist traditions associated with
the god (in some accounts Quetzalcoatl would rain fire from heaven,
and throw stones which flattened forests). This is consistent with
astronomical evidence that, in early historical times (say before 700
BC), Venus would have been outclassed as a spectacular object by the
active comets of the Taurid swarm. It may therefore be that in such
representations and tales a memory is preserved of the deity as
originally a bright periodic comet of an earlier period.
For the more recent Assyrian period, around 1400-100 BC, the only
significant texts are star lists, and the so-called astrolabes. These latter
were very common and widely distributed, texts from Assur, Nineveh, Uruk
and Babylon having been found, covering almost a thousand-year period.
They consist of 36 stars, 3 to a month, covering the 12 months of the year.
Evidently, they were calendars, the predawn risings of the stars marking
out the course of the year. Oddly, the ‘planets’ Jupiter, Mars, Mercury and
so on are included amongst the star lists. But as calendar markers the
planets are useless since they wander along the zodiac and have different
positions from one year to the next. Scholarly discussion of this problem is
confined to the statement that ‘This is very curious, for planets do not
appear in a fixed month of the year’. Intense annual meteor streams,
recognizably associated with conspicuous comets, would however be
natural calendar markers. Associated with the star lists are texts, and in
them one reads ‘when the stars of Enlil have disappeared, the great, faint
star which bisects the heavens and stands, is Marduk: he (the god) changes
his position and wanders over the heavens’; or alternatively, ‘The red star
which, when the stars of the night are finished, bisects the heavens and
stand there whence the south wind comes, this star is the god Marduk’ (our
italics). As descriptions of the planet Jupiter, these text appear less than
satisfactory, but as descriptions of a great comet in zodiac with a huge but
faint red tail bisecting the sky and associated with a fixed meteor stream
(Enlil) from the south, they seem to be more readily understandable. If
further textual analysis should confirm these suspicions, one will have a
direct identification of Babylonian gods with specific short-period comets
most of which, however, will now be degassed and invisible.
So far, the discussion has related only to the last few thousand years, the
period of recorded history. The Earth, however, is almost a million times
older than this. The story of catastrophe from the sky, occurring within the
human timescales, must therefore take place in a much larger context. In
looking at this larger picture, at the great mass extinctions and geological
processes of the past, one may therefore get a better insight into the
microcosm which is human history of the last 5,000 years. And in fact, an
understanding of the larger picture turns out to be essential for a realistic
assessment of future shocks. Let us therefore see to what extent the
labyrinth of history, and the bull of heaven, can be united into a coherent
model by the thread of science.
III — THE THREAD OF
SCIENCE
14 — Galactic Imprint
The Earth is a small planet but a highly active one, much more so
than say the Moon, Mercury or Mars. The continents of Earth drift
and collide, riding on underlying currents of slow-moving, semimolten rock below the crust. The viscosity of the material below the
crust is high, a billion times that of asphalt say, and it will only move
in response to large forces applied steadily for thousands of years.
The mobility of the Earth’s crust extends to the sea floor: the ocean
bed wells up and spreads outwards from long central ridges, before
sliding under the continents at the ocean margins. Thus the ocean
basins are very young, only a few percent of the ages of the
continents. All these motions are very slow, typically an inch a year;
human hair grows faster.
A picture has emerged, then, of a terrestrial crust which is not static,
but which is made up of a few continental plates drifting over the
Earth’s surface. Although the pattern of movement of continents
over the globe has really only been worked out for the past 400
million years, less then 10 per cent of the age of the Earth, it appears
that in the central regions on North America can be detected the
fused remnants of earlier continents and island arcs going back at
least two billion years. About 400 million years ago there was, in
effect, a single large land mass around the south pole. The mass
broke up into a few fragments which, about 200 million years ago,
began to move slowly apart. A map of the Earth of, say, 60 million
years ago is quite recognizable although, for instance, the Atlantic
Ocean was then much narrower. Much of geological history can be
understood in terms of the continual drifting and colliding of the
giant continental rafts. It is known, for example, that the great
mountain-building episodes in Earth history have taken place along
the boundaries where the continental plates have been pushed up at
the ocean margins, generating earthquakes as they rise and fold,
while the sea floor has been subducted back down into the mantle
whence it came. The enormous pressure and heat generated at the
base of the rising mountains creates molten granite which, forced up
along with basalt from the deeper mantle, reaches the surface as lava
and volcanic ash. The theory of continental drift was neglected long
after its introduction to a skeptical scientific community, and yet (in
its modern guise of plate tectonics) it now provides a framework
within which many geological processes — mountain building,
earthquakes, volcanism and so on — can be understood. If this were
the whole story, there would be no need to look to the heavens for an
explanation of events on or under the ground: the Earth can do it all
by itself. This has been the traditional view of many geologists,
palaeontologists and other Earth scientists.
And yet, within the last few years, it has begun to look as if there is a
problem with a purely Earth-centred viewpoint. The problem arises
because, if processes on Earth, such as mountain building, were
driven only by the random collisions of giant continental rafts, there
would be no pattern to them. It seems that this is not so; plate
tectonic events recur with some degree of regularity: there are times
when the Earth is active and times when it is not. And it turns out
that, when we look at the timescales associated with these patterns of
activity, a very significant clue emerges.
That there might be some regularity in Earth processes has been
suspected for a long time. Over fifty years ago the geologists Arthur
Holmes 106 thought that the level of the seas rose and fell in 30-
million year cycles (see figure 11). The changes involved are large,
typically 100 metres or more. Holmes also thought that these
variations occurred, somehow, in phase with worldwide outbursts of
volcanic activity and the like. Holmes went further: superimposed on
this cycle, he thought, were even larger events — the creation of great
mountain ranges — taking place at about 200-million-year intervals.
Such ideas, invoked before the modern understanding of plate
tectonics and before rock ages could be accurately dated with
radiometric techniques, could be no more than suggestive. In fact,
they were largely overlooked in the heat of the plate tectonic
revolution. But the ideas of these early workers, so long ignored, bear
a remarkable resemblance to new results which are now emerging
from researches using improved rock dating methods and the
increasing sophistication of geological science. 107
Figure 11. Sea level cycles of 30 and 250 million years, claimed
by Arthur Holmes in 1927 and correlated by him with periodic
geological disturbances (line drawing published by Benn,
London). Although this diagram is qualitative and was drawn
long before plate-tectonic theory, it anticipates much recent,
quantitative research on geological cycles.
In 1968, partly from a study of ocean temperatures as revealed by
fossil shells, the geologist Dorman suggested that there might be a
30-million-year world temperature cycle (see figure 12). And in 1970,
the geologists Hatfield and Camp, from Toledo, argued that
catastrophic mass extinctions of life took place at regular intervals.
They saw, in the record, seven intense mass extinctions, two of which
(65 and 225 million years ago) were exceptionally ferocious. They
thought that, overall, mass extinctions happened every 80 or 90
million years, with an exceptionally catastrophic one every 225 to
275 million years ago.
Figure 12. A 30-million-year cycle in global temperature,
claimed by Dorman in 1968 using the proportion of ‘heavy
carbon’ in fossil shells as a thermometer. Little weight should be
given to the ‘cycles’ on the left due to the sparseness of the data
on which they were based.
They thought (correctly) that the Sun completes an orbit round the
Galaxy once every 200 to 280 million years, and (wrongly) that the
Sun oscillates out of the plane of the Galaxy in a period of 80 to 90
million years. Putting these data together they deduced that the
Sun’s orbit around the Galaxy must somehow be causing mass
extinctions of life on Earth.
In the following year, the Scottish geologist Maclntyre 108 reported
an extensive study of the ages of a particular type of rock, known as
carbonatite, in Canada. The significance of carbonatite is that it is
extruded from the mantle of the Earth during times of high volcanic
activity; it therefore acts as a marker for disturbances of the deep
interior of the Earth. Any regularity in the production is best found
on an ancient stable region such as the Canadian Shield. MacIntyre
found the remarkable result shown in figure 13. On this evidence
Earth disturbances seem to have occurred, not at random, but at
intervals of roughly 230 million years over the last 1,800 million
years at least.
Figure 13. A 230-million-year cycle in the production of
carbonatic claimed by the geologist MacIntyre. Carbonatite is
extruded in lava outpourings and is a measure of the degree of
disturbances of the Earth’s outer regions due to the movements
of continental plates. This ‘grand cycle’ is about the length of a
galactic year.
There is no significant difference between 230 and 250 million years
in the present context — even now geological timescales beyond
about 200 million years are not accurate to more than, say, 10
percent. In effect, MacIntyre’s modem study supports the much
older and cruder work of Holmes. No internal process is known
which could generate convulsions of the Earth at such intervals.
In fact 230 million years is about the time it takes the Sun to orbit
once around the centre of the Galaxy. This fact did not go unnoticed
by MacIntyre. However he had no suggestion to make as to how
something as remote as the Sun’s galactic orbit might generate
massive outpourings of lava from the interior of the Earth.
Others noted the Holmes timescales in other terrestrial events. In
1973 the geologists Steiner and Grillmair noted that ice ages came
and went on the Earth with periods corresponding to the galactic
year (say 250 million years) and the Sun’s up and down motion
through the flat disc of the Galaxy (say 30 million years). Many
factors, they considered, must go into the making of an ice age. In
order of importance, they listed the distance of the Sun from the
centre of Galaxy, the motion of the Sun out of the plane of the Milky
Way, the geometry of the Earth’s orbit around the Sun, the position
of continents and oceans over the globe, altitude of mountains and
plateau, and unknown causes. In 1977, MacIntyre noted that there
had probably been five worldwide geological events over the past 130
million years which were probably caused by sudden changes in the
motions of the continental plates. This gives a mean interval between
these events of 26 million years, very like the shorter cycle which
Holmes thought he had detected. Also in 1977, the American
geologists Fischer and Arthur noted that changes in sea level, and
mass extinctions of ocean life, seemed to be taking place at 30
million year intervals. Vogt noted that the volcanic activity on Earth
was not sporadic but that worldwide outbursts occurred at distinct
epoch; he, however, thought that the timescale involved was about
50 rather than 30 million years. But still the mystery remained: if the
Galaxy was having such a profound effect on the Earth, how?
The first hint (from the geological point of view) at the nature of the
cosmic forces involved was published by Seyfert and Sirkin 109 in
1979 (see table 11). These geologists found what appeal ed to be a
direct connection between terrestrial cycles and celestial encounters
of a violent kind. Listing the ages of the known impact craters on
Earth, they found that these seemed to be bunched, as if impacts
were occurring at about 26-million-year intervals. They also found
that these bursts seemed to coincide with widespread geological
upsets (Holmes again!), caused by sudden movements of the
continental plates. The clear implication was the brief but violent
bombardments of the Earth were somehow causing terrestrial
convulsions. These convulsions are not small affairs: one observes
for example a particularly sharp bend in the Hawaii-Emperor chain
of Pacific volcanoes, including Hawaii, which occurred 42 million
years ago during one of the bombardment episodes. These volcanoes,
most of which are submarine, are formed by the drifting of the
Pacific plate over a hotspot located underneath the crust of the
Earth. The plate has been sharply dislocated and, because they
interlock like the pieces of a jigsaw, the entire surface of the Earth
must have been affected.
After many years of neglect, these claims of periodicity are now being
rediscovered, using new fossil and other data and sophisticated
statistical techniques (table 12). In 1984 Raup and Sepkoski found
what appeared to be a 26 million year cycle of mass extinctions in the
marine microfossil record, as if the ocean planktonic species were
liable to become extinct en masse at these intervals. Since then the
subject has been controversial though claims for a similar periodicity
were made for both the cratering and volcanic records. Some of these
data are shown in figure 14. Mathematical techniques exist for
picking out any periodic signals which may be hidden away in noisy
data and we have applied one such technique to the cratering and
volcanic information. There does indeed seem to be a periodicity in
the terrestrial record. The period is not, however, 30 million years, as
frequently claimed, but 15 million!
A possible reason for this discrepancy becomes apparent when we
look at the history of the Earth’s magnetic field. The strength and
direction of this field at any given epoch in the past can sometimes
be found, frozen in rock which solidified at the epoch in question. In
this way it has been discovered that quite frequently in geological
history, the magnetic field of the Earth reverses, north and south
magnetic poles interchanging rapidly, within the space of a thousand
years of so. The history of the Earth seems to be episodic, long
periods of stability when no reversals occur interspersing with
episodes of 50-100 million years duration when the magnetic poles
flip over at the rate of perhaps five or ten times in a million years. In
figure 15 is shown the rate at which the geomagnetic field has been
changing over the last 200 million years. From this we can see that,
beginning 80 million years back, field reversals have been taking
place at an ever-increasing rate. This rate, however, has not been
steady: the reversals tend to occur in surges. And in this figure, we
see that these surges are periodic, happening every 15 million years
or so, the most recent episode having peaked only a few million years
in the past. 110
Figure 14. Rate of extinction of families over the last 250 million
years, after Raup and Sepkoski (permission D.M. Raup). The
arrows represent a 26-million-year cycle. There is no indication
of an ‘interpulse’ between the large peaks but the data may not
be at a level where they can be detected. There have not been
enough 10-km bolides over the period in question to produce
these extinctions, and if due to external forcing, a more
continuous interaction between Earth and sky is implied: both
the prolonged climatic and prompt impact effects of cometary
debris, with galactic modulation, appear to be adequate.
The reversal pattern, however, is not that of a uniform cycle. Rather,
it seems to show weak and strong surges alternating, and another
way of describing the record might be to say that there is a strong 30-
million-year cycle with a weaker interpulse. This, probably, is why
the cycle length detected in the earlier records was 30 million years:
as the quality of the data deteriorates, so it rapidly becomes very
difficult to detect even the major cycle, and a true 15-million-year
weak-strong-weak cycle is misread as one of double the period. The
15 million-year cycle had in fact been thrown up by the mathematical
techniques used by several workers examining geological data of
high quality, but most of these workers had chosen to ignore the
result because it did not fit theoretical preconceptions then in vogue
favouring a 30-million-year cycle.
Figure 15. Frequency with which the north and south magnetic
poles of the Earth interchange, after K.M. Creer and P.C. Pal. in
this more nearly complete geological record a variable 15/30-
million-year cycle is clearly seen superimposed on longer-term
trends.
The question arises whether a pattern of this character could
somehow be imposed as the Sun orbits around the Galaxy, and the
answer is in the affirmative. The Galaxy affects the solar
environment in part through tides. As we saw in chapter 9, these
tides are negligible on the surface of the Earth or within the
planetary system, but they do disturb the orbits of long-period
comets, which are only just gravitationally bound to the Sun. The
magnitude of the tides will vary with the disposition and mass of
galactic material around the Sun. and the flux of comets into the
planetary system will vary accordingly. Now it is true that the Sun
moves around the Galaxy in a porpoise-like fashion, oscillating up
and down through the galactic plane as it orbits the centre. This is
likely to yield a 30-million-year pattern of tidal stresses and comet
inflow, as galactic material is concentrated towards the plane.
However the Sun has also, for the past 100 million years or so, been
immersed in a spiral arm known as the Orion arm. It turns out that
spiral arms themselves contain substantial amounts of material,
enough to create their own tides. Above and below a spiral arm, this
tide acts in the opposite direction to that of the galactic disc material.
The disc and arm tides cancel each other when the Sun is about half
way to the highest point of its orbit, with the result that the comet
flux is temporarily halted. The overall result is a basic cycle of 15
rather then 30 million years, with a strong surge when the Sun is
near the plane, and a weaker one when the Sun is around the high
point of its orbit. The time taken for the Sun to cross a spiral arm is
typically 50-100 million years, and these cycles will come and go,
episodically, on such timescales.
The origin of the magnetic field of the Earth is not well understood,
but it is agreed to be due, in some way, to movements in the fluid
core of the Earth. The diameter of this core is about half that of the
Earth; it probably encloses an inner, solid core at the very centre.
The fluid material of the core, probably a mixture of molten iron and
nickel, flows at a rate of about 2 millimetres a minute: a good deal
faster than human hair grows. It is likely that the magnetic field at
the surface of the Earth is created in some way by patterns in the
movement of the molten metal; these patterns must therefore be
affected in some way by the Galaxy, presumably through the
intermediary of cometary interactions.
Although a reasonably complete understanding of the Earth’s
magnetic field has not yet been arrived at, its intermittent character
is unmistakable. This, coupled with the piecemeal nature of the
terrestrial activity, seems to bear out what has occasionally been
suspected in the past from the stratified appearance of the geological
record, namely the possibility that evolution, even on the largest
scales, is not a steady continuous process. Rather, we observe a
sequence of unitary events of differing intensity, the intervals
between which are ostensibly random though also periodic. As we
have already noted, this combination of irregularity and periodicity,
with bunching in the record corresponding probably to several
galactic cycles over the range 15-250 million years, implies events
that are produced in surges which may be attributed to variations in
the Solar System environment as the Sun makes its journey through
the Galaxy. But the most significant factor so far as evolution is
concerned may now be understood as owing more to the effects of
recent unitary events than it does to any smooth underlying
Darwinian process. Earth history is then in principle a sequence of
equilibrium states (involving relatively little evolution) separated by
moments of crisis brought on by the arrival in circumterrestrial
space of new giant comets. In other words, we deal with a pattern of
‘punctuated equilibrium’ and a fundamentally catastrophic Earth
history.
Such findings do not undermine the popular Darwinian view of
evolution but they certainly modify it to a substantial degree. Thus,
according to Darwinian theory, we have to imagine some continuous
process operating on living species which is capable of introducing
small random variations and some other barely perceptible process
which allows preferred selections to be made amongst these
variations. Such selection, it is supposed, results in that systematic
long-term departure from the status quo which we recognize as
evolution. The mutation of genes has been identified as the neutral
random process whilst the directed process, natural selection socalled, apparently works so as to maximize a species’ long-term
chance of survival in a given environment — hence, ‘survival of the
fittest’. The implication is that living or active matter has the capacity
to continuously adapt to the environment and reach a state of
equilibrium or perfect balance. However, the fossil record is not
really like this at all. Whole families, orders or classes suddenly
vanish from time to time, each event followed by a period of recovery
during which a reduced or modified gene pool, taking species
together, is apparently seeking once again to reassert itself over a
hostile environment. According to this evidence, evolution may be
Darwinian for short spells but the true course of evolution is
dominated by the destruction of species during the moments of
crisis. Although there remains a sense in which we observe survival
of the fittest, life is also subject to an equally significant principle,
survival of the luckiest. In recent years therefore, the theory of
evolution has been escaping from its Victorian mould.
At the molecular level, the biological process of adaptation is now
known to depend on the capacity for self-replication, a property that
active or living matter seems to hold in common with inert matter.
Inorganic matter for example replicates itself in the form of crystals,
whilst organic matter replicates itself in the form of complex
structures like DNA. In one case, the outcome is relatively static and
robust for a given environment; in the other, it is relatively dynamic
and subject to decay. Any difference seems to be one of degree rather
than kind, with for example the tobacco mosaic virus having a foot in
both camps — in effect a continuum of ever-increasing complexity is
assumed: physics into chemistry and chemistry into biology.
On this reckoning therefore, adaptation, or natural selection, is
merely the equilibrium-seeking process that we observe taking place
on the grand scale in a response to minor adjustments to the
otherwise invariant process of self-replication at the molecular level.
Since the biological record now indicates that the process regularly
achieves both new equilibrium and new species in the aftermath of a
crisis (or unitary event), then the actual destruction of species as well
as the introduction of new components at the molecular level, would
seem to be involved in the short periods of change.
Many biologists/scientists still seek to explain these relatively short
periods of change in terms of some kind of instability in the normal
evolutionary process which the evidence indicates is generally robust
and stable. However it now seems clear from the astronomical
perspective that life can no longer be seen as taking place in a closed
box: the Earth’s environment can no longer just be ignored. Purely
internal explanations for periods of rapid change are probably
therefore no longer adequate.
It is conceivable that the moments of crisis not only bring conditions
that lead to the destruction of species, they may also bring brief
additions to the gene pool from outside. The notion that comets are
the fundamental source of biologically active material in the universe
is clearly an important one, enthusiastically espoused by the
astronomers Hoyle and Wickramasinghe 111 in recent years. The idea
is very old however: the astronomer William Herschel, for example,
who found royal favour during the reign of George III, gave it his
support; indeed it could even be said to go back to Plato and in its
guise as the source of kingship, even to the beginnings of
astronomical theory itself. Whatever the final judgment on this old
notion, the history on life on Earth is revealing now that evolution
has a cosmic as well as a terrestrial dimension.
Somehow, then, the Galaxy is exerting a decisive control over both
geological processes and the evolution of life. If only to assess the
current security of homo sapiens, we have to look more closely at the
mechanisms of control involved. It seems, for example, that the
galactic disturbances affect even the core of the Earth, shielded
though it is by an overlying mantle of rock 2,800 kilometres thick
and with twice the rigidity of steel. How can the Galaxy achieve this
feat?
15 — Terrestrial
Catastrophism
The long history of the Earth, then, is distinguished by a relatively
steady evolution superimposed on which are rapid, sometimes
overwhelming changes, whether in the evolution of life, or mountain
building, or even disturbances in the core itself. Many geologists over
the years have voiced the suspicion that these changes have a galactic
periodicity and have speculated that, somehow, the Galaxy is
affecting the affairs of Earth. What was lacking in all these
speculations was a mechanism for inducing the galactic periodicities;
and it was not until the late 1970's, with the discovery of the
molecular cloud and Apollo asteroid systems, that the mechanism
was discovered. There are two main causative links in the chain
connecting the Galaxy and the Earth. The first of these is the ebb and
flow of the galactic tide which, we have seen, is reflected in the ebb
and flow of comets into the inner planetary system. The second link
is the existence of giant comets. Rare though they are, it is the giant
comets which contain the bulk of the mass which enters the
planetary system, and it is their disintegration products which
interact most strongly and directly with the Earth. As we have seen,
the break-up of a very large comet will produce a wide range of
debris, from objects 10 kilometres across, to probably hundreds of
kilometer-sized bodies, to temporary swarms of sub-kilometre
objects, down to dust, in quantities sufficient to block the path of
sunlight. We now ask, how would the Earth machine respond to the
influx of such material? Consider, first, an asteroid impact.
The largest known asteroid currently in an Earth-crossing orbit is
Hephaistos. It was discovered only in 1978, which gives an indication
of the difficulty of finding these objects, whose diameters are only a
few kilometers and whose surfaces may be as black as soot. We have
seen that this object is ten kilometers in diameter and is in an orbit
very like that of the Taurids, but rotated through about 90 degrees.
Probably, some tens of thousands of years ago, it split from the giant
comet whose debris now circulate along the Taurid track. Hephaistos
is a potential collision hazard, although not immediately so. It would
strike the Earth at just over 30 kilometres/second, with an impact
energy of about 100 million megatons, that is, equivalent to the
simultaneous unleashing of about ten thousand full-scale nuclear
wars. What would happen?
If Hephaistos struck the ocean it would within seconds generate a
cavity in the ocean water and underlying bed about 40 kilometres
wide. It would penetrate the crust to a depth of perhaps 20
kilometres, exposing the underlying hot mantle. A column of water,
steam, rocks and dust many kilometers high would be hurled into the
air, and waves about 5 kilometres high would rise around the impact
site. These would drop to a few hundred meters amplitude at 1,000-
2,000 kilomteres distance but on entering a continental shelf or
shallow seas would rear up again into a tsunami several miles high,
overturn, and generate intense and prolonged turbulence.
The reefs of the world are found in shallow ocean water, generally
less than two hundred feet down. Most of a reef comprises a fine,
sandy material loosely bound by the creatures and plants anchored
to the underlying limestone framework of coral skeletons. The effect
of sudden, violent and prolonged turbulence generated in the seas by
a giant impact would be to uproot and disperse the living part of the
reef and choke the filter-feeding creatures near the base of the food
chain. In addition plankton would suffer through the thick pall of
stratospheric dust which would float down through the air and
greatly reduce sunlight for at least a few months; if photosynthesis
came to a halt, there would be wholesale collapse of food chains.
Many modern plankton are already living at the limit of their
tolerance of ultraviolet light. Above the atmosphere, ultraviolet light
is of lethal intensity. Most of this radiation never reaches the ground,
being absorbed by a layer of ozone in the stratosphere. But the
creation of nitrous oxides in the fireball would react with the ozone
high in the atmosphere, so that when the dust finally settled there
would be an ultraviolet deluge and this would itself cause sweeping
extinctions. Oceanic ecological systems are complex, particularly reef
systems. Because of the lack of seasonal change they are subjected to
very little stress and are therefore not adapted to cope with a major
upset in the environment. They depend on and creating a delicate,
stratified system of organisms adapted to the light available at each
level. Severe turbulence, lack of sunlight, or high ultraviolet dosage
are each lethal to a reef community; and yet these are precisely the
consequences of a large impact. It seems that a colliding Hephaistos
would wipe out the plankton and reef-building communities
worldwide. Presumably, with the base of the food chain undercut,
there would be a domino effect throughout the marine kingdom.
Now there is strong fossil evidence for the occurrence of at least five
major episodes of marine mass extinction (see figure 16), the largest
worldwide in extent and instantaneous to within the resolution of the
stratigraphy. Of these, the extinctions in the late Permian 225 million
years ago were the most severe; there was a ‘mass extinction of truly
dramatic proportions, possibly approaching (though of course not
reaching) complete extinction of marine life’. To produce the
extinction rates observed amongst the classes, orders and families at
the Permo-Trassic boundary, something like 90-96 per cent of
species may have vanished. The organisms which were destroyed
were at all levels of evolutionary development and included the
trilobites, five hundred species of plankton, most sponges and
echinoderms and, most spectacularly, the corals: thousands of
species simply vanished. For ten million years following the event,
coral reefs did not appear anywhere in the world. It seems that this
event and others like it in the marine record cannot be explained in
terms of the normal turnover of species à la Darwinian selection;
there must have been a worldwide catastrophe which affected life
forms en masse. After the event, only 2,000-10,000 marine species
were left. The diversification of life that followed the Permo-Triassic
extinction seems to have been in part a matter of chance, some
unlikely groups faring well, consistent with random events
dominating the survival process: the meek were as likely to inherit
the Earth as the powerful. Land extinctions of apparently
catastrophic nature were also involved, about 80 per cent of reptile
and amphibian families becoming extinct, corresponding to a very
high extinction at the level of species.
If Hephaistos were to strike land, a crater perhaps 200 kilometres
across would be gouged out within a few minutes, with rims several
kilometers high. The basin would flood with lava. An impact in India
would flatten forests in Europe, setting them ablaze. Debris thrown
out of the crater would range from mountain-sized lumps,
themselves formidable missiles, to hot ash, thrown worldwide and
adding to the incineration below. Earthquakes would be felt globally
and would everywhere be at the top end of intensity scales, with
vertical waves many metres high and horizontal ones (e.g. push-andpull waves) of similar amplitude. These waves would run around the
Earth for some hours and would presumably create great
devastation. Land creatures would of course suffer also from the
cutting out of sunlight for months in equatorial regions and possibly
one to three years in polar ones.
The effects of such great impacts then are likely to be felt over at least
continental dimensions on land, and worldwide in the oceans. It is
not surprising therefore that a connection has often been proposed
between past mass extinctions of life on the one hand, and the
impact of comets or giant meteorites on the other. Such suggestions
could only be speculative because what was lacking was, firstly, a
firm astronomical foundation (for example, until recently impact
rates were not known ever approximately), and secondly, evidence
on the ground, say in the form of a large crater. As we have seen,
however, a solitary large impact is, from the astronomical point of
view, unlikely to be the only agency at work; and indeed, when one
looks in more detail at the ‘hard evidence’, both astronomical and
geological, discrepancies in a simple-impact scenario begin to arise.
No extinction has captured the public imagination more, or spawned
a greater variety of suggested causes, than the extinction of the
dinosaurs 65 million years ago. A thriving and complex community,
which had dominated life on Earth for over 140 million years, simply
died out. Perhaps some part of the popular fascination with this great
extinction arises because it included such memorable creatures as
tyrannosaurus rex and diplodocus; or perhaps because it raises the
question whether ‘it could happen to us’. At any rate, many ideas
have been proposed over the years for this mass extinction. One of
these ideas, due to the palaeontologist de Laubenfels in 1956 and the
geophysicist Urey in 1973, that the dinosaurs were wiped out by a
great bolide about 10 kilometres across, was revived in 1980 by a
group of scientists at Berkeley, California 112 in order to explain an
iridium excess discovered by them at the extinction boundary. The
significance of iridium is that it is depleted in the Earth’s crust but
relatively common in meteorites (say two parts in a million). The
presence of this layer was taken to mean that dust had been thrown
up from the impact of such a body, settling worldwide. Evidence and
hypothesis were announced in a blaze of publicity, the theme was
enthusiastically taken up by science journalists, and very soon
geochemists and geologists the world over were seeking iridium
anomalies and other signs of a great destroying impact.
The Berkeley proposal and the method of its announcement thus
stimulated much valuable and detailed research on this important
extinction boundary. Others, more traditionally, continued to argue
that the extinctions were not instantaneous and that interval
processes, dropping sea level and climatic change, were the real
explanations for the mass exterminations. As Raup remarked in
1986: ‘Some ... see these developments as heralding major shifts in
the way we look at earth history and organic evolution. To others, the
past 5 years have seen a science gone mad.’ The controversy, at the
time of writing, shows little sign of abating, opinions frequently
dividing in unexpected directions. For example, the American Earth
science community has tended to favour the idea of a great impact
while the European one has tended to look askance at the idea; the
geochemists have tended to be pro, while most palaeontologists have
generally been anti; and so on. We shall argue shortly that both
views are wrong, and that the broad controversy has arisen
unnecessarily because proper account has not been taken of the
environment of our planet. What is at stake, of course, is an
understanding of the history of the Earth. But the argument is not
simply an academic game: our assessment of the hazard existing now
for mankind depends critically on which of the broad pictures is
nearer the truth.
Whether the dinosaur extinction was a single, dramatic event is a
highly controversial issue and depends on detailed analyses of fossil
remains and their reworking. One school of thought holds that the
dinosaurs were an intelligent, complex, thriving community which
was overwhelmed by sudden catastrophe. Another holds that the
dinosaurs were in decline long before their final extinction. Whether
or not the great extinction was instantaneous, it seems to have taken
place very rapidly in geological terms, even the non-catastrophe
school conceding that the decline in population accelerated rapidly
in the last 300,000 years of the Cretaceous period. There were many
ocean extinctions too at around this time, including important
marine groups such as ammonites, corals and many types of
plankton; again, the rapidity of these extinctions is a controversial
question, periods of 50 years or less having been proposed.
There are problems with the ‘single impact’ interpretation of the
iridium deposition. In the first place the concentration of the element
is too high. An asteroid would excavate several hundred times its
own volume of crustal material and this would of course be mixed in
with the asteroid material. At many sites, however, the iridium has
been diluted by only about twenty times its own volume of material.
While high concentrations might occur locally, around the impact
site, it is clear that overall there is a serious discrepancy. It has also
been argued that in deep-sea cores the iridium is spread through the
large thickness of sediment. Burrowing creatures and the tails of fish
must disturb the sediment, but this so-called bioturbation may at
several sites be insufficient to explain the discrepancy.
Nor does the chemical composition seem to fit the stony meteorite
idea too well, the abundance ratios of rare elements such as osmium
and rhenium being inconsistent with an origin in such a body. There
are enormous and unexplained overabundances in common
elements too, such as antimony and arsenic, relative to meteoritic
material. And the situation has been complicated by a surprising
finding from the eruption in January 1983 of the Hawaiian volcano
Kilauea. 113 Airborne particles collected from the volcano were found
to have very large concentrations of arsenic, selenium and other
elements found in high abundance at the extinction boundary. The
particles were also found to be strikingly rich in iridium. Probably,
this material has come from the upper mantle of the Earth. This
raises the interesting question whether the iridium anomaly might be
a gigantic red herring. For this proposition to work, great volcanisms
must have taken place on Earth 65 million years ago, on a scale some
tens of millions of times greater than the Hawaiian outburst. There
were such eruptions, namely the voluminous outpourings of lava
which gave rise to the Deccan traps in India. The lava from that event
contains little iridium; nevertheless, it is interesting to speculate
whether, had a volcanic source of iridium been known in 1980, a
meteorite impact would have been suggested. It has been suggested
that acid rain from this volcanism might have wiped out the
dinosaurs. On the other hand, protagonists of the impact
hyphothesis can point to an impressive array of evidence.
Catastrophic vegetation changes amounting to a ‘profound ecological
shock’ took place across the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary, at least at
sites studied in North America, Europe and Japan. 114 The
devastation was sudden and could have been produced by blast,
conflagration or sudden freezing several months’ duration. It is also
true that the iridium enhancement is sharp at several locations. And
in 1985 a most interesting discovery was made that very large
amounts of soot are present at the extinction boundary in Denmark,
Spain and New Zealand. 115 It is difficult to avoid the conclusion
reached by the discoveries that wildfires, global in extent, must have
taken place during the extinction. On the other hand, not a trace of
meteoritic debris, say in the form of stony inclusions in the
sediments, has ever been found at the boundary.
How are these discrepancies to be resolved? As we have stated,
despite its almost universal adoption by the ‘catastrophist’ school
throughout the 1980's, the stray impact of a 10-kilometre bolide is
not, from the astronomical point of view, particularly realistic.
Enough is now known about the interplanetary and galactic
environment to permit the construction of a realistic astronomical
framework for terrestrial catastrophism. This framework turns out to
be quite difficult from the simplistic one which has been widely
adopted by the new catastrophism:
1. The astronomical environment as we have described it leads
one to expect as the prime process, not solitary random impacts
but bombardment episodes, galactically controlled. These
impose a temporal pattern on Earth processes.
2. Within an impact episode, events are dictated by a handful of
rare giant comets. The disintegration of these bodies liberates
copious amounts of dust into meteor streams, the dust
spreading out to form dense, temporary zodiacal clouds which
may be several hundred times as massive as the one existing at
the present day. The Earth, orbiting within this complex of
debris, is subjected to a barrage of large bodies but also
experiences large and intermittent inputs of dust into the
stratosphere. If the comet is large, and the dust sufficiently fine,
sunlight might be greatly dimmed at ground level for as long as
the dust cloud or meteor stream persists: this may be hundreds
or thousands or tens of thousands of years. If only a hundred
thousandth part of a gram enters each square centimeter of the
Earth’s atmosphere each year, severe climate effects
inevitably follow. The Earth becomes blanketed in a white veil.
The veil scatters sunlight back into space; but on the other hand
it is transparent to infrared radiation, that is heat, from the
ground. The Earth can therefore lose heat but cannot gain it.
The result is a traumatic drop in the mean temperature of the
globe. Over the few million years of an impact episode there
could be something like fifty such dusting of the stratosphere.
3. The Earth may run into swarms of bodies, each with the
potential for numerous blasts and global conflagration, as well
as a number of larger Apollo asteroids.
The spectacular prompt effects of a series of impacts, then, will
complete with environment deterioration caused by a series of sharp,
climatic coolings. These will lower the level of the seas. A cold Earth
transfers water from the oceans; ice caps grow larger and mountain
glaciers form. The seas recede from the continental margins, which is
more bad news for coral reefs. A great deal of water can be locked up
in ice: the present Antarctic ice cap is larger than Europe and two
thousand metres deep. In all, ice covers about one-twelfth of the land
area of the continents. If it were all to melt, the level of the oceans
would rise by 60 metres. The astronomy tells us, then, that an
episode of mass extinction of life will often be a complex, prolonged
and traumatic affair. This complicated reality will manifest itself in
the stratigraphic history of the Earth.
These expectations may be matched against the geological and
biological records. In the first place, Earth history does seem to have
an episodic character superimposed on a periodic one, the timescales
associated with each fitting the galactic expectations. Second, the
high concentrations of iridium found at the dinosaur extinction
boundary at several localities, and the absence of bulk meteoritic
debris, are hard to explain in terms of a single big bang but easily
understood in terms of zodiacal dust as an important provider of the
input. Third, there is increasing evidence for a multiplicity of impacts
at the dinosaur extinction boundary. The evidence takes the form of
various shocked quartz particles, 116 formed in different hypervelocity impacts, and in the precise dating of a small crater, the
Manson crater, at the extinction boundary which could not have
caused the extinction by itself and which therefore seems to have
come in as part of a swarm or shower. Fourth, the predilection for
occasional swarms may account for the huge amount of soot at the
dinosaur extinction boundary: if laid down instantaneously, about a
quarter of the biomass of the Earth was probably consumed in flame.
An Earth ablaze is within the capacity of an exceptionally intense
swarm to produce, but probably beyond that of even a Hephaistossized impact.
In 1989, amino acids were found at a well-studied Danish
Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary site. These particular compounds
were of non-biological origin but of a sort which are not found on
Earth. As extraterrestrial markers, therefore, they are probably more
significant than say iridium, which might be volcanic. Their
occurrence around the dinosaur extinction boundary is therefore
important evidence that a major extraterrestrial input was involved.
However, it is difficult to see how these compounds, which were laid
down over a metre above and below the extinction level, could have
been brought in by a 10-kilometre bolide. The fireball in the impact
reaches temperatures typically 100,000 C, more than enough to
destroy these and indeed any compounds. It seems then that the
material probably arrived as comet dust of submicron size, trickling
down through the atmosphere over some tens of thousands of years.
The temperatures reached by such panicles during entry are modest
and of only a few seconds’ duration, enough to permit survival of the
compounds.
There are fundamental effects in the response, not only of life on
Earth, but also of the Earth itself. In figure 16 the half dozen largest
marine extinction events are plotted along with the variations of sea
level over the past 570 million years. 117 On each occasion the ocean
level has dropped by several hundred metres before the mass
extinction: it is as if the Earth knew that a huge missile was coming!
This has been used as an argument in favour of a purely terrestrial
process as causing mass extinction of species, as has the huge
simultaneous volcanism of 65 million years ago: it is claimed that
either or both wiped out the dinosaurs without intervention from the
sky.
But of course this uniformitarian argument is unsound. The sea level
regressions are indeed surely inexplicable in terms of a ‘stray impact’
picture; 118 but, as we have seen, it is the wrong picture for the
uniformitarians to attack. This illustrates the point that much of the
controversy over the impact question has arisen because the
protagonists have either misunderstood the nature of the
astronomical environment or ignored it altogether. 119 The
significance of the correlation between the sea-level regressions and
the mass extinctions is that another fundamental terrestrial
phenomenon, the level of the oceans, is being affected through
stratospheric dusting and the concomitant global cooling.
We can further illustrate this approach by examining the event of
about 42 million years ago, which saw the beginnings of the
primates, and was connected not only with vulcanisms of the Pacific
basin and disturbance of the floor of the Indian Ocean, but also with
major changes in the chemistry of the oceans and with a severe
cooling of the Earth. The extinctions of that period (impact epoch
number 3 of Seyfert and Sirkin) are in phase with the 15- and 30-
million-year cycles, as are the dinosaur extinctions.
Detailed studies of the microscopic fossils covering this period have
been carried out. 120 These fossils were recovered from deep sea
drillings in the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific oceans and should
therefore give a global view of the extinctions of the period. About 70
percent of the plankton became extinct (with a possibly synchronous
mass extinction of land mammals). The fossils from the three oceans
show that the extinctions did not take place in a single huge
catastrophe; rather, they were spread over an interval of several
million years. These events are associated with sharp, step-like
coolings of the globe, on land as well as in the sea. Clearly, a single
impact could not achieve this.
On the other hand, there are indications of cosmic inputs over the
time span of the extinctions. About 1-10 billion tons of small glassy
stones usually regarded as impact ‘splash’ material (the North
American tektites) cover much of the Earth’s surface, but they do not
coincide with any of the planktonic extinctions. An excess of the rare
element iridium near the boundary was discovered in Caribbean
cores. This element is common in meteorites and, we have seen, its
presence has usually been taken as an impact signature. There are
also some microtektite layers. The iridium layer does not coincide
with any of these, having been laid down about 30,000-100,000
years before the nearest of them. This is once again inconsistent with
a single random impact but is best explained by the infall of about 50
billion tons of dust (say 50 million tons a year for a thousand years)
on to the Earth, followed by the impact of a few-kilometre-diameter
fragment from the same meteor stream. The dust input is several
hundred times that at the present day. These must have been
traumatic times! Once again, then, the overall extinction, lasting
some millions of years, is best explained by a bombardment episode
of a few million years duration and dominated by the disintegration
products of great comets — kilometer-sized asteroids and dust infall
from dense meteor streams, the dust especially plunging the Earth
into long, cold epochs. The dust intermittently kicked up by the
multiple impacts would of course add to the chaos. Overall, the effect
is that of a prolonged battering of the environment.
In 1986 the palaeontologist Jablonski 121 reported a detailed study
which he had carried out on the extinction pattern of marine bivalves
in the Atlantic coastal region. The study covered a 16 million year
period which encompassed the great extinction of 65 million years
ago. An interesting result of this analysis was the discovery that the
pattern of extinction, during the mass event, was not just an
intensification of the background extinction: in particular, species
might vanish during a mass extinction for reasons which had no
connection with their robustness during normal times. Major
environmental change, rather than Darwinian competition, forced
the evolutionary pace; and once again, the meek were as likely as the
strong to inherit the Earth. The mass extinction was therefore
something special, qualitatively different in its effects.
Now, it appears that the semi-regular spacing of such extinctions,
studies of which have so far been limited to the last 250 million
years, marches in time with the other Earth processes such as the
magnetic field reversals, and with the impact episodes as found from
the cratering record. Thus, if the Holmes cycles are real, fundamental
geological processes are being modulated or even caused by galactic
forces.
The evidence for continental drift for example is usually taken to
reflect an underlying pattern of continually applied stresses forcing a
slow movement of the asthenosphere, the semi-molten rock on
which the continental plates ride. But such continuity does not easily
account for the intermittent if not cyclic nature of the plate tectonic
phenomena. Seyfert and Sirkin proposed that multiple impacts
might generate plumes of hot material rising from the mantle, their
combined force breaking plates apart and causing them to separate.
The greatest lava outpourings in the history of the Earth have
occurred at intervals of about 400 million years, and ocean basins
may open and close in about 500-million-year intervals. Over such
an interval, the largest single impactor expected is about 25-30
kilometres in diameter. Its impact energy is about 2.5 billion
megatons, 25 times that of a Hephaistos collision. Such an energy is
about that involved in the formation of the multi-ringed Mare
Orientale basin on the Moon. An impact of this magnitude on Europe
would fluidize the continent. Brittle fracture of rocks would take
place down to about 15 kilometres depth. Along fault lines, rock
failure takes place at lower shock pressures and a very large impact
would open up cracks over approximately hemispheric dimensions.
The opening up of these fissures would produce a fluid magma
invading these fissures, and might further drive global volcanism.
The seismic energy from such an impact is best left to the
imagination: earthquakes alone might exterminate all vertebrate life
on Earth. Plate motions are very likely to be affected by such a
disturbance to the underlying asthenosphere. The generation of a
crater 500 kilometres wide is likely to involve some vertical crustal
motion which will itself greatly perturb the flow of asthenosphere
material, at least within a few thousand kilometers. Very large
impacts may therefore, as proposed by Seyfert and Sirkin, carry
enough energy to affect plate motions.
The South African geologist Hartnady 122 has suggested that a 300
kilometre wide circular depression, about 500 kilometres north-east
of Madagascar, may be the site of a great impact of 65 million years
ago. He has pointed out that this feature, the Amirante basin, was at
the centre of a sudden shift of the mid-ocean ridge at that time, the
ridge jumping over 500 kilometres to the north-east. He has also
pointed to the existence of a massive submarine slide of sediments,
covering 20,000 square kilometers, on the east coast of Africa, as
one might expect from the generation of a huge tsunami. Just across
the water are the Deccan traps of about the same age, which (we had
previously suggested) might have been caused by the triggering of
volcanoes from a large impact. It is possible then that a major impact
from that period has been identified. It is unlikely, however, to have
been the only one, and in fact the shocked quartz particles discovered
at the boundary indicate that land impacts also must have been
involved.
Smaller impacts generate less disturbance but in the course of an
impact episode it is likely that fault lines will be extensively broken
by smaller bodies; the disturbances may still be large over plate
dimensions and capable of inducing the orogenic and tectonic
episodes identified by Holmes, Seyfert and Sirkin and others.
To reverse the Earth’s magnetic field, impacts must profoundly
disturb the motions in the fluid core of the Earth. An oblique impact
will change the rotation of the Earth by a very small amount. In the
hours following a large impact, waves will run around the crust and
mantle of the Earth, gradually dissipating their energy. Within a
week the Earth will have acquired a new direction and period of
rotation, differing by say less than one part in 100 million from the
previous values. However the liquid core of the Earth does not pick
up the new spin immediately and carries on in the old direction. At
the interface between the mantle and the core, stresses are set up
and there are large disturbances in the fluid velocity. It seems that
these impacts may seriously affect the dynamo which generates the
Earth’s magnetic field.
An indirect but probably even more effective mechanism is the
formation of a large ice cap from a sudden cooling. The consequent
reduction of sea level, say by 100 metres, increases the equatorial
velocity of the Earth by about 0.5 centimetres a second, which is
about ten times higher than the flow velocities in the Earth’s core. A
rapid climatic change from the dusting of the stratosphere would
therefore lead to a major disturbances of the flow pattern in the
liquid core. Or, the mechanism for both vulcanisms and magnetic
field disturbances may be simpler: the mere load shifting as ice caps
come and go may set up stresses enough to disturb the Earth in
mantle and core, and cause these effects.
It is then possible, in principle, that either an oblique impact or a
large climatic disturbance, the latter arising either from impact or
direct meteoric input, would upset the geomagnetic dynamo and
cause a field reveral. 123 It is unlikely, however, that the sporadic
background of ordinary kilometer-sized comets is adequate to force
the pace. The tendency to reversal will be most pronounced during a
comet shower, when a large comet is shedding its material into the
Earth’s environment.
The Earth, then, is a huge storehouse of information relating to its
continuous interaction with the Galaxy through the agency of very
large comets. The variety and complexity of all the physical, chemical
and biological processes involved represents but a fraction of the
information that may yet come our way to clarify and reinforce our
understanding of what is going on. There is no question, therefore,
that the current picture of what happens is still incomplete. But the
essence of the scientific analysis that is described here is the rigour of
the continuing search for the simplest composite picture that meets
all the relevant data in a straightforward way. One thing stands out
however: the importance of very large comets.
However, in arriving at such a conclusion, it is a necessary part of the
scientific process that some experts will pursue alternative models, if
only to make sure they do not work! Some, for reasons best known to
themselves but possibly out of inertia or lack of imagination, will
continue to assume the Earth is isolated in space, despite the
enormous variety of information to the contrary. Others will select
some of the evidence to their liking and invent things in the sky that
nobody has seen to meet their particular targets. The nature of our
environment is clearly of fundamental interest to mankind and there
is always a risk, on account of the subject’s importance, that the
unwary reader may likewise be captivated by invented schemes that
only go a very little way towards explaining everything we see.
For the sake of completeness, we may illustrate this problem by
referring to a rather bizarre speculation 124 put forward by two
groups of scientists in 1984, one of them associated with the Berkeley
stable which had revived the stray meteorite hypothesis only four
years earlier. With the rediscovery by Raup and Sepkoski in 1984 of
cyclicity in the fossil marine record, and the similar rediscovery of
periodicity in the cratering record, it was seen that the stray
meteorite hypothesis would have to be abandoned (the long-standing
earlier work on these periodicities having until then been ignored.)
The account for the ‘new’ cyclicity, a faint companion star in orbit
around the Sun was arbitrary invoked. If this star had a 26-millionyear period of revolution around the Sun, and if there is a dense,
undiscovered ‘inner cloud’ of comets which also orbit the Sun, then
every 26 million years the companion, pursuing an eccentric orbit,
would dip into this inner cloud and perturb its comets, generating a
brief and very intense comet shower. The Berkeley group, with
dramatic flair, named the star Nemesis.
The astronomical objections to this proposal are numerous, and in
the normal course of events it would undoubtedly have remained an
entertaining and obscure speculation. However, once more, the
hypothesis was announced in a blaze of publicity, the theme was
enthusiastically taken up by science journalists, it became the topic
of popular books and television shows, and once more, to many
workers in the Earth sciences, unfamiliar with astronomy, it must
have seemed that a new and substantial proposal was being made.
Certainly the companion-star hypothesis adopts the central
mechanism of the galactic one, namely the creation of comet showers
through regular comet cloud disturbances. However, the idea that
the forcing is caused by a companion star rather than the Galaxy
meets with insuperable problems.
In the first place, to have a period of 26-32 million years or so, the
binary would be at a mean distance of about 90,000 a.u.
(astronomical units) from the Sun, going out to around 180,000 a.u.
at its furthest point. Now binary stars are very common in the
Galaxy, but pairs as wide as the system postulated are almost
completely unknown and are found only amongst very young stars,
only a few million years of age. Amongst stars as old as the Sun, the
maximum separation of binary components is about 5,000 a.u. The
authors of the hypothesis seemed to be unaware that what they were
postulating was a system of a type which is, so far as is known from
many sky surveys, non-existent. 125 The reason there are no very
wide binaries amongst stars of solar age stripped away when the
Solar System encounters a giant nebula; the same happens to wide
binaries. The wider they are, the more weakly they are gravitationally
bound to the Sun and the shorter their survival times. It is easily
shown that Nemesis would orbit the Sun for only a few hundred
million years before being pulled from its orbit by a passing massive
nebula and thrown into interstellar space. The probability of its
having survived for the 4,500-million-year history of the Solar
System is negligible.
It might be that Nemesis was originally in a smaller, less easily
dislodged orbit, and has just recently been thrown into its supposed
present one. But the Earth periodicities are known to go back at least
200 million years, and it is still very unlikely that the star would
remain bound to the Sun over that period. Additionally, although the
companion could be given a longer life by supposing it was originally
in a tighter orbit, comets would then have been swept up at a much
higher rate in the past, say more than a billion years ago. Depending
on the structure of the comet cloud, the impact cratering rate from
the disturbed comets would have been hundreds or thousands of
times higher than the present rate. We have a record of past
disturbances in the form of the lunar cratering, and it is clear (figure
17) that comets are most unlikely in the past to have been thrown
into the planetary system at these very high rates; indeed the average
bombardment rate has not systematically changed for the last 3.9
billion years.
Figure 17. Lunar cratering history, form 3.9 billion years ago to
the present (due to Baldwin). The average impact rate has been
relatively constant although surges lasting not more than 50-100
million years of uncertain date are also present. A huge reservoir
of potential impactors is implied, along with a relatively steady
input mechanism. The Galaxy may both replenish and disturb
the cloud of comets surrounding the Solar System. The high
impact rate 3-9 Byr ago and even higher rates earlier are
ascribed to the mopping up of debris left over form the origin of
the planetary system, and are apparently unrelated to the
cratering history since.
Finally, the companion star is supposed to be roughly at the farthest
point of its orbit from the Sun, which would put us half way between
bombardment episodes. This is inconsistent with the evidence for a
recent disturbances of comet cloud and Earth (table 5). There are
other severe problems of a more technical nature, but enough has
perhaps been said.
It seems quite extraordinary that a hypothesis so lacking in scientific
depth has spawned so much attention, even within the scientific
community itself. Normally a new idea, such as this, does not gain
approval until it has run the gauntlet of peer review and scientific
publication, but in this instance, the attention of the media appears
to have been whipped up in advance, more in the style of show
business than science, and one can only assume that the normal
academic processes was somehow distorted by the publicity. Of
course, the chief defect of Nemesis is its superfluity, a fact which was
concealed by the fanfare of publicly with which the theory was
announced. From what is now known of the Galaxy, and the
population of small bodies in the Solar System, periodic disturbances
of the Earth through bombardment episodes are expected. That
these episodes were the cause of great mass extinctions including the
dinosaur extinction of 65 million years ago; that the Earth itself
would be disturbed through worldwide vulcanisms, magnetic field
reversals and so on; and that these global events would be forced
with galactic periodicities, and been specifically predicted on
astronomical grounds before the iridium discussions or the
rediscovery of the terrestrial cycles. Nemesis, like the ‘theory of the
stray meteorite’ which went before it, therefore simply goes beyond
the astrophysical requirements at the present time. That is, the
Nemesis hypothesis was an unnecessary ad hoc response to the
terrestrial periodicities, the galactic theory having predicted them in
the first place.
The astronomical framework, grounded in celestial observations, is
the basis for the theory of terrestrial catastrophism described here.
The extraordinary misconception that, on the contrary, proper
astronomical theorizing can only follow the terrestrial discoveries,
whether iridium or periodicities, has since been put about by some of
the Earth science community. Thus the paleontologist
Raup: 126 ‘After Sepkoski and I proposed a 26-million-year stationary
extinction periodicity, several astrophysical explanations were
proposed’; the geologist Flallam: ‘The only hard evidence for
disturbance of the Oort (comet) cloud is the iridium anomaly’; and so
on. The reader will by now recognize such statements as nonsense,
but they are not untypical. Possibly the blazing publicity which
accompanied the Berkeley ideas brought about this curious approach
to knowledge. More probably the new developments have come as a
surprise and what we have observed is a certain lack of reflection as
Earth scientists jostle to achieve prominence in what is now widely
recognized to be a seminal era in the advance of human knowledge.
However that may be, it is in our view essential, if one is to arrive at a
true picture, to take account of all the relevant evidence: ‘hard
evidence’ in the geologist’s sense has to be coupled with some respect
for hard astronomical facts as well. Put another way, we do not need
a 10-kilometre asteroid to land in our presence to demonstrate the
amount of kinetic energy it will release. In particular, the correct
picture must explain recent as well as past events in the terrestrial
period. Thus the giant comet, and indeed the historical record, are
essential elements in the quest for overall truth. It is this inextricable
linkage between the very recent and the very remote past which
lends urgency to the study: if we get the grand picture wrong, the
next set of old bones in the ground could be ours.
16 — The Naked Ape
There is, of course, a transition between the catastrophism of
geology, and that of history. The transition is one of timescale, and it
is bridged by mankind. Human beings, in common with monkeys,
apes and lemurs, belong to the order of primates. The origin of this
order, like much to do with human evolution, is lost in the mists of
time and the fog of controversy. It is likely that some time between
40 and 44 million years ago, around the time of the EoceneOligocene events, there was a precursor, a creature which was
neither monkey nor ape nor lemur, but something in between. Some
have identified this creature as amphipithecus, an animal about the
size of a monkey whose fossilized jawbones have been found in
Burma. If this is correct, then our remote grandparents were fruiteating, tree-living creatures. Of course, if the ancestral primates
originated in south-east Asia, it raises the problem of how their
monkey descendants come to be in South America. Possibly they
spread into Africa across what is now the Red Sea, and then reached
the New World by island-hopping across the Atlantic, which was
then much narrower and contained a string of volcanic islands.
Another possible route is through northern Asia, across the Bering
Straits and down the west coast of North America. Whatever the
route, it would have been covered not by purposeful migration but by
the random movements of thousands of generations.
At about the time our ancestor appeared, the Earth was seized by a
geological convulsion: our roots lie in a bombardment episode.
Forty-two million years ago, intense volcanic activity spread
throughout the whole Pacific area, from Japan to the Peruvian
Andes, in New Zeland and the island arcs and trenches of the
Philippines. The sea floor itself, from the Indian Ocean to far
northern latitudes, was profoundly disturbed, the floor of the Indian
Ocean, for example, beginning to spread rapidly out from a central
volcanic ridge. Nor was this great disturbance confined to the Pacific
Ocean. In Africa, there was a sudden uplifting of land in Kenya. The
same happened to the western side of North America. And it was a
time of intense mountain building which saw, for example, the rise of
the Pyrenees in Europe.
Coincident with these great upheavals was a dramatic cooling of the
Earth, in the form of a series of rapid and sharp temperature drops.
The oceans became cold both at the surface and in deep waters. This
was reflected in an accelerated extinction of many important
categories of plankton, the extinctions happening in a step-like
manner matching the temperature drops. On land, although many
parts of the globe remained warm in summer, winters in equatorial
regions developed a Siberian harshness. By the time this period had
grown to a close, a few million years later, the mammal population
had crashed and the forests of the Earth had shrunk: palm trees had
vanished form Greenland, and the jungle from England.
As the trees receded, grasslands spread in their place, and
grasseating creatures spread with them. Ancestral horses and camels
appeared, and early elephants with long snouts. With the grasseaters
came the hunters, primitive cats and dogs. As the climate moderated,
the mammals diversified. Many living groups have ancestors going
back to that distant time: moles, bats, rabbits, mice, whales, seals,
kangaroos and others, about five thousand species in all. It was in
East Africa that the evolution of the progenitor humans and apes
seems to have progressed. Its climate around 22 million BC was
warm and its landscape was a mixture of grassland, woodland and
forest. The evolution of the primates can be reconstructed in part
from the fossil record, in part from slight biochemical affinities
between living species: we carry our remote genealogy in our blood.
From such lines of evidence it has been inferred that a growing split
between ancestral monkeys on the one hand, and the lineage which
led to the orang-utan, the gorilla, the chimpanzee and man on the
other, was under way some time after 22 million BC.
Around 15 million BC, the Earth was seized by another geological
trauma. This was one of the periodic pulses we have described, the
Solar System at this time being at a critical stage in its galactic orbit,
and back along the massive Orion spiral arm. Once more, there was a
global increase in volcanic activity along with lava outpourings in
many areas around the world. The Alps, Andes and Taurus mountain
ranges rose and folded. There were major deflections in the
spreading of the sea floor, and Baha California split from Mexico.
This disturbance was of great evolutionary significance: Africa
drifted into Europe and Asia, squeezing out the ancient Tethys Sea
which had separated them. Thus a bridge was formed, and the apelike creatures and other mammals migrated across it into Eurasia.
The climate in the region straddling bridge was warm and seasonal,
and forests were widespread. It is likely that the great apes developed
from an ancestral stock during this time. It is likely also that the very
first true hominid, directly ancestral to man, dates from this period.
Ramapithecus and Sivapithecus, whose fossils are found in the
Himalayan foothills of India and Pakistan, date from this period.
They are, probably, proto-men.
A fog of uncertainty surrounds the evolution of these proto-men for
the next ten or more million years. It is known that man-like
creatures were walking on two legs around 4 million years ago, their
footprints having been uncovered in Tanzania and a half-complete
skeleton having been found in Ethiopia. These are the earliest
undisputed hominids. They lived in communities, in open savanna.
Other than this, little is known of their lifestyle.
Between 2.5 and 2 million years ago, the planet was yet again
disturbed. Volcanic ash recovered from ocean sediments obtained
during deep sea drilling seems to show a dramatic increase in the
rate of explosive activity over the last 2 million years. Certainly on
land there was increased volcanism in New Zealand, Japan, the
Andes, Mexico, Iceland, the African Rift valley and elsewhere. This
trend is illustrated in figure 18 where the number of ash layers
measured in various deep-sea drilling sites and lava outpourings
around Hawaii, are shown. The oceanic record as a whole goes back
only 20 million years, but it is clear from the 60-million-year span
covered by the Hawaiian record that there were surges of activity
about 40 million BC, 15 million BC and recently (say 2 or 3 million
BC).
But now a new element enters into the picture: ice. For a long period
of time, going back perhaps 65 million years, the Earth has been
cooling. Sixty-five million years ago there were no polar caps,
although it is likely that the polar seas froze over in winter. But about
20 million years ago, permanent ice caps began to develop. About 10
million years ago, glaciers began to flow down high mountain tops.
And about 2.5 million years ago, ice sheets began to spread over
large areas of land in the northern hemisphere. These last 2.5 million
years have seen the onset of what promises to be a long, cold ice
epoch on our planet.
Figure 18. Outpourings of lava from various oceanic sites. Peaks
in the output can be seen at around 40 million years ago, some
15-10 million years ago, and within the last few million years.
These epochs are consistent with the peaks in the cratering
record
At this time also, the African hominids underwent a further
evolutionary change. At least two species of proto-men arose. There
was a small-brained vegetarian, Australopithecus, who existed for a
million years and then, for unknown reasons, became extinct. A
creature with a larger brain, homo habilis, lasted until just over 1.5
million BC. There is evidence that these primitive African hominids
used stone implements.
The first sophisticated toolmakers, probably the direct ancestors of
modern man, appear about 1.6 million years BC. Their earliest
remains are found in Africa, but by 1 million years BC they were
present as far away as China and survived there until at least
230,000 BC.
Remarkably, it seems from genetic studies of modern human types
that at most a few hundred individuals migrated from Africa and that
this single group gave rise to both the Mongoloid and Caucasian
races. Be that as it may, a cave near Beijing (the former Peking) was
occupied continuously by these toolmakers for nearly a quarter of a
million years before the accumulated detritus finally forced Peking
Man out. He was able to hunt, he could control if not make fire, and
he could cook. And then, less than 200,000 years ago, homo erectus
was replaced by early forms of modern man. Neanderthal man, the
most conspicuous form of these subspecies, was a powerful,
muscular creature with strong teeth which may have been used for
chewing hides. He was a European, living a hardly life on the fringes
of the great ice sheets. Behaviourally, he was quite unlike ourselves.
Intellectually, he may well have been our equal.
While these evolutionary trends were under way, the ice epoch came
and went in a series of ice ages, each lasting for typically 100,000
years. True modern man appeared 40,000 to 45,000 years ago,
probably during a warm period between glaciations. Neanderthal
man vanished. But then, 40,000 years ago, the Earth was plunged
into another ice age. The temperature fell with astonishing speed,
perhaps within a decade, the whole Earth (north and south)
becoming about 15 C colder than it is now. The cold reached its peak
20,000 years ago. An ice sheet half a mile thick covered Ireland,
Britain, the North Sea, central Europe and northern Russia. Another
one covered Greenland and North America down to New York and
the Great Lakes. These sheets were thicker to the north, reaching a
depth of 1.5 miles over Scandinavia and Canada. Yet somehow a
series of migrations took place over the frozen ice sheets and across
the land bridge which is now the Bering Straits, so peopling the
Americas.
And then, almost as suddenly as it came, the ice age vanished. By
around 9,000 BC, it was over; the ice sheets had retreated to
Greenland, the huge mountain glaciers had vanished from Scotland
and Switzerland, and the climate was suddenly warmer. We can still
see the recent signs in the freshly sculpted valleys of northern
Europe, the glacial moraines and erratic boulders which strew
Swedish fields, and the fact that Scandinavia is rising, an inch a year,
rebounding up from the release of the overlying mass of ice.
The retreat of the ice brought arid, semi-desert conditions to
northern Africa, Arabia and the near East. Fertile conditions were
now to be found only in elongated strips alongside rivers, or in oases.
The human apes could no longer maintain themselves by roaming
over wide territories: the domestication of animals and the growth of
crops followed. Alongside the great rivers, the need for irrigation and
tillage of large areas forced men to co-operate in numbers far larger
than a hunting group. Neolithic settlements were replaced by the
village and town. Cities then followed, the evident precursors of
empires and prospective world domination.
With the departure of the ice, then, the human ape has surged
forward, the process of cultural evolution apparently greatly
outstripping biological evolution. Whereas in the previous 30,000
years man had hunted in groups, used stone tools and weapons, lived
in small settlement, painted and carved, and appears to have had
some sort of belief in totemism, in the 10,000 years following the
retreat of the ice, civilization has now emerged. Civilization, it seems,
is a part of the process enabling the human ape to generate the
surplus that supports some of his number as technologists and
scientists, architects, artists, writers, philosophers and priests, and it
is by the output of these leisured groups that it is often judged.
Another measure of civilization is the extent of its control over
Nature. By this second yardstick, it seems that the astonishing
growth of science and technology over the past three hundred years
has put homo sapiens in a dominant position, not only within his
community of primates but within the animal kingdom as a whole.
By now, the human ape can hardly see beyond the cultural surge in
which he is enmeshed. He learns to accept leisure and dominance as
his birthright. Earth history, human history, cultural history become
what they seem, an undeviating progress towards civilization itself.
There is, however, another dimension to the story. For out of the sky,
we now learn, there may occasionally appear a cataract of fire, a
celestial catastrophe which emerges suddenly to terrorize and
destroy. Between cataracts, the human ape is tempted to develop
empire and culture, the captivating prelude to dominance and
leisure, only to be lulled into a sense of false security, there by failing
to see the cosmic forces him ...
All of this brings us finally to the question: to what extent are we now
secure, and to what extent is our progressive mastery over Nature
during the past 5,000 years an illusion, a mere quiet spell before
some uncontrollable change overwhelms us?
17 — A Risk Assessment
If the ‘stray meteorite’ hypothesis, revived by the Berkeley school and
uncritically adopted by a large segment of the American Earth
science community, should turn out to be correct, the mean interval
between devastating impacts is then reassuringly long. Likewise, if
the Nemesis proposal is correct, we are half way between comet
showers and need not worry about major impacts for another 15
million years. If, however, the galactic hypothesis is broadly right,
the story is different. For in that case we are still in the tail end of an
impact episode and are living in the wake of the most recent giant
comet enter the realm of the inner planets as a consequence of that
episode. This comet, in our picture, has been responsible for a
potentially devastating impact in the twentieth century; swarm
activity and a near-million-megaton lunar impact in the Middle
Ages; a Dark Age over Europe a few centuries earlier; widespread
destruction of civilization in at least the second millennium BC, the
Biblical Flood at the start of the third; and most traumatic of all, the
last ice age, an event which retarded the development of the human
species for 20,000 years. Clearly, in assessing the hazards now faced
by mankind, we have to get the grand astronomical picture right. Our
view, expressed in these pages, is that the scientific case is strongly in
favour of the galactic theory.
The astronomical community has so far shown little awareness of the
potential human consequences of even a single impact. For example,
in a very recent textbook on comets the astronomers Brandt and
Chapman state that one expects a Tunguska-like impact about once
in every 2,000 years, the devasted area from such being fairly local.
They add that ‘No one should lose much sleep over this situation
even if agitated by uninformed doomsayers.’ Leonard Kulik’s study of
the Tunguska event, on the other hand, led him to a very different
perspective: there is no reason whatever why a similar visitation
should not fall at any moment upon a more populous region. Had
this meteorite fallen in central Belgium there would have been no
living creature left in the whole country. Had it fallen in New York ...
all life in the central area of the meteor’s impact would have been
blotted out instantaneously.
Notwithstanding Kulik’s warning, there seems to be a view abroad
that the ‘responsible’ attitude to take towards impact hazards is one
of public reassurance, presumably as a counter to uninformed
doomsaying. However given what we have now seen of comet
Encke’s progenitor, one suspects that, behind such attitudes, there
may lie uninformed complacency. And, as our ‘nuclear error’ sketch
indicates, there may be a new dimension to the problem which did
not exist in Kulik’s time. Clearly, it is important neither to exaggerate
nor underrate the cosmic hazards revealed in this book, but to
discuss them as realistically as possible. We therefore ask: how often
do we expect natural missiles to strike the Earth at the present time,
singly or in swarms, and how plausible is the scenario with which we
(hopefully) alarmed the reader early in this book?
IMPACT RATES
It seems to be a rule of Nature that the larger the body, the rarer it is.
Certainly the rule holds for the assorted bodies which belong to the
Solar System. Away from town lights, on a clear dark night, and with
dark-adapted eyes, shooting stars can be seen every few minutes.
These particles are usually only a fraction of a millimeter across. In a
few weeks of constant observing, one might see a brilliant fireball,
bright enough to light up the landscape as it streaks across the sky.
This is usually caused by a fluffy body the size of a pea coming in at
about 60,000 miles an hour (25 kilometres a second). At the other
end of the scale, as we have seen, we deal with life-extinguishing
monsters, bodies tens of kilometers across which unload millions or
billions of megatons of energy on to the Earth, and which arrive on
geological timescales. But what lies between?
This problem may be approached in a number of ways (see The
Cosmic Serpent). One way is to look at surviving impact craters on
Earth. One must scale up from this by estimating how many craters
have gone unrecorded through erosion and so on, and how many
missiles failed to reach the ground in the first place. Iron meteorites
comprise only a small fraction of all bodies but because they survive
passage through the atmosphere intact they are responsible for a
disproportionate number of holes in the ground. The trouble with
this approach is the extreme incompleteness of the record. Only eight
craters probably due to iron meteorites are known, more than 100
metres across; and yet one might reasonably expect five hundred to
have been created since the end of the last ice age. Likewise only five
iron craters more than a kilometer across are known, whereas the
rate at which iron bolides enter the atmosphere leads one to expect
fifty to have been generated over the last million years.
The Barringer crater in the Arizona desert is about 1.2 kilometres
across and is probably 40,000 or so years old. From the size of this
crater it can be calculated that the missile must have had an impact
energy in the range 5-15 megatons, and from the debris scattered
around it is known also that the missile was an iron meteorite. In fact
for the most part only meteorites made of iron would reach the
ground to produce a crater in this energy range; those made of stone
would on the whole produce a shower of little craters; those made of
ice, that is cometary fireballs, would break up in the air. The record
of falls over the years shows that, amongst the bodies entering the
atmosphere with such energies, perhaps about 1 in 70 are irons. Iron
meteorites are unlikely to be cometary products and probably from a
more steady background of bodies thrown into the inner planetary
system from the asteroid belt. This is consistent with the fact that 2
of the 50 known Earth-crossing asteroids have metallic surfaces.
Scaling up from an incomplete record with this uncertain conversion
factor, one finds that for every impact producing a crater like the one
in the Arizona desert, there must have been about 70 which have left
no trace; instead of one such impact in 40,000 years we expect one
land impact every 600 years. But of course, for every land impact we
expect two in the oceans, and these would leave no trace.
This line of argument leads one to expect a collision of several
megatons energy to occur somewhere on Earth every 200 years or
so. Overall, we reached the conclusion that ‘a few dozen sporadic
impacts in the tens of megatons, and a few in the 100 to 1,000
megaton range, must have occurred within the past 5,000 years’. For
comparison a strategic warhead has typically half a megaton
explosive energy. These are average impact rates; they do not take
account of the possibility of surges of activity.
Since then, support for these figures has come from a quite different
line of argument. One problem with making these estimates is that
the impacts are something like Nature’s perfect crime, leaving little
or no trace long after the event. The great majority of the bodies
carrying up to several hundred megatons of impact energy break up
in the air. Those which do reach ground produce shallow craters
which soon vanish through erosion and overlaying with sediment.
Merely counting one or two holes in the ground and scaling up is not
a very accurate procedure. The Moon, however, is subject to the
same bombardment history, it has no atmosphere, and very little
erosion. A crater once formed is preserved forever or until such time
as it is buried under the debris from another crater. The American
geologist Shoemaker 127 has carried out a study of small impact
craters on the Moon. The results of this work are shown in figure 19.
His ‘best estimate’ rate shows that, over the past 5,000 years, there
have been:
• about 17 impacts of at least 12 megatons energy
• about 7 impact of at least 30 megatons energy, and
• 1 impact of at least 800 megatons energy.
Figure 19. Baseline rate for impacts of various energies on the
Earth, after E.M. Shoemaker. Based on the size distribution of
small craters on the Moon.
Once again, these are averages. We shall argue presently that the
current impact rate may be substantially higher than this. However
for the moment we shall adopt these as our ‘baseline rates’, and
attempt to evaluate the various cosmic hazards. There are really four
scenarios amalgamated in our opening story: a 20-megaton impact is
mistaken for a nuclear attack; a 200-megaton impact takes place on
an urban area; a 1,000-megaton impact induces a climatic
catastrophe; and the Earth encounters a swarm of missiles.
NUCLEAR ERROR
Of all the risks considered here, this is, in principle, the most easily
countered: one merely has to be aware of it. Given this knowledge,
rational and circumspect men would make no nuclear response. In
the tale then implausible?
There are two main assumptions in the nuclear-error scenario: (1) a
Tunguska event, or a swarm of such events, may be interpreted as a
low-level nuclear attack; and (2) the likely response to such an attack
is an immediate counterstrike. It postulates a vulnerable command
which may be wiped out at any moment, so forcing an urgent
decision to be made on the basis of a complete misreading of the
situation. We shall analyse these assumptions a little more closely.
It might be supposed that with a topic as eschatological as nuclear
warfare, every conceivable eventuality has been explored including
that of a misinterpreted Tunguska-like impact. Whether this is so or
not is not publicly known, the information or lack of it being locked
up in, for example, the SIOP books of the United States. However,
our discussion of impact rates and swarms in the relevant energy
range is based on relatively recent research, and one may ask
whether the politicians and soldiers who have evolved the SIOP
concept over the past 30 years have fully considered the possibility of
such misinterpretation. Some evidence suggesting a lack of
awareness of this possibility is the otherwise comprehensive study by
the Swiss academic Daniel Frei 128 who was commissioned by the
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research to examine the
general question of whether a nuclear war could be started
unintentionally. Frei, in his study published in 1982, examines
nuclear terrorism, the proverbial ‘insane colonel’, accidental launch
due to human or technical failure, organizational breakdown in a
crisis, misperceptions under stress, irrationality of leadership,
misunderstandings due to differing perceptions of strategic doctrine,
and many other possibilities. But nowhere does he consider the
possibility of misunderstood impacts! Thus although we cannot
know, we may suspect that in the first chaotic minutes of the crisis,
the minds of commanders will be preoccupied totally with the Bomb,
not at all with the Swarm. The risk are enormously compounded by
the likelihood that a large impact would threaten the
communications systems used for the command and control of
nuclear weapons. This arises because of electromagnetic effects
which are likely to be caused by the passage of a large moving fireball
through the atmosphere and its explosion near the ground. The
fireball would interfere with radio and radar transmissions by
generating electrons in the ionosphere, create its own radio waves in
the fiery tail, and generate a damaging electrical surge, probably
thousands of volts per metre, in long cables on the ground. The
following effects are tentatively anticipated:
1. Radio propagation from satellites communicating by VHF
would be degraded due to the increased electron density, the
signal failure lasting some tens of minutes over a region perhaps
a thousand miles wide. Those with UHF transmitters would be
blacked out for less time over a smaller area. The ground
receivers, however, would be subject to a damaging electrical
surge.
2. Short-wave radio is the most extensively used system for longrange communication. The radio waves in this range, bouncing
successively off ionosphere and ground, may go round the Earth.
However an increase in electron density will lead to absorption
at these frequencies and so drastically curtail signals. Dumping
even a fraction of a megaton at high altitudes may lead to a
blackout persisting for several hours over a region more than a
thousand miles across.
3. Medium-wave radio is less useful for communications and a
significant increase in the D-layer electron density would render
them almost useless.
4. Submarine communications are carried out by way of VLF
radio waves, which may be 1-10 kilometres long. The D layer
acts as a mirror to such waves, which are reflected off its
underside and can travel for thousands of miles, guided between
D layer and ground. Surprisingly, even these may be affected by
a high altitude fireball, D-layer changes causing mutual
interference between waves bouncing from the ground and from
the sky. Because of their great range, the effect could be
important even three thousand miles from a very large fireball.
5. Systems requiring long communication lines (for example, the
2,000 miles between Washington and the North Dakota silos)
and solid-state circuits (for example computers) would be
vulnerable within perhaps a thousand miles of a large impact.
There is a reasonable prospect, then, that coming in with the
devastation of one or more large impacts on a civilized area, there
will be widespread and immediate breakdown of radio, radar,
telephone, some satellite communications, and computers. A fewhundred-megaton impact on Nevada would affect communications
over the whole of the United States, and probably over Canada and
Mexico also. It should be emphasized that there are many large
uncertainties in predicting the electromagnetic effects of a swarm or
even a single large collision. Nevertheless in the present state of
knowledge it seems that the first assumption in the nuclear error
scenario is not unreasonable: the impact(s) would closely resemble a
number of simultaneous ground and air bursts over one or more
target areas, in appearance, damage and electromagnetic effects.
Assume then, that in the panic of the moment the National
Command Authority believes that nuclear weapons have been
exploded on a low-level target in the USA (an assumption more likely
to hold during a period of tension). It is likely that, in spite of
widespread and immediate disruption, there are surviving channels
of communication, and that within minutes of the impact an
overwhelming flood of information will start to come in, possibly
faster than it can be dealt with. There will be an atmosphere of
intense stress if not panic, shock that the explosions could have
taken place without warning, and an overriding fear that more
bombs may come in at any time. The President or his surrogate will
also be subjected to a babel of advice:
The Pentagon advisors will be clamouring to get the President to
execute ‘their’ particular military option, from a host of ‘instant’
plans drawn up from the information flowing from their pet
warning devices. The President will certainly not be left alone in
the White House Situation Room for a moment’s reflection
before he makes the most important decision of his life. 129
There is in fact considerable doubt amongst experts as to whether a
nuclear war could be handled managerially; that is, the ‘crisis
management’ structure would be beyond the capacity of human
beings to operate in a real situation. For example, the defense expert
Steinbruner 130 considers that great internal conflict would be set up
because of the ‘inherent tension between the imperative to avoid war
and that of controlling the circumstances of initiation if war cannot
be avoided’. We have in fact made this a central decision-making
issue in our story.
Emotional stress is a particular — hazard. There have been many
occasions when leaders have buckled under the strain at critical
moments in war, and no more stressful situation can be imagined
than the one postulated here. Many studies have shown that, beyond
a certain level, the ability of individuals to think through a situation
deteriorates. Misperception may arise through information overflow.
During fastmoving events those at the centre of decisions are
overwhelmed by floods of reports compounded of ‘conjecture,
knowledge, hope and worry’. In coping with the flood there is a
tendency to ‘omission, error, queuing, and filtering’. Under stress
reality becomes distorted; new evidence is looked at with the eye of
preconception; adversaries are seen in stereotyped form; there is a
tendency to jump to conclusions; a loss of perspective; a searching
for scapegoats; exaggerating the positive sides of a decision and
minimizing the negative; and so on — in all at least seventeen
psychological effects of severe stress have been identified.
Stress affects groups as well as individuals. The need for quick action
contracts the group to a very few, enhancing the problem of
information overload. ‘Groupthink’ emerges strongly in a crisis —
there is no time for dissenters and experts outside the small circle;
there is an illusion of invulnerability; collective rationalization; a
failure to look at alternatives; a failure to rethink in the light of new
data; a failure to balance risks properly. What Frei and Christian call
‘the dangers of cognitive distortion’ are exacerbated by the
complexity and sophistication of modern strategic doctrines. Like
Steinbruner, they question whether the decision makers, ‘in the
hectic situation of a crisis emergency, will still be capable of deciding
and acting fully according to the requirements of the complex logic of
strategy ... one may ask whether they are also in a position to
understand all the contingency plans flexible and varied options
offered by today’s nuclear arsenal’.
None of this gives one boundless confidence that good decisions will
be made in the chaos of the moment. For example the apparently
idiotic suggestion made by one of our fictional characters, that
pointless targets were chosen so as not to justify the risk of
retaliation and yet act as a ‘keep our’ warning in relation to some
major military incursion, is in fact a well-recognized war scenario,
the ‘called bluff, discussed by Frei and others. In the stressful, countdown atmosphere of the Situation Room, and lacking recognition of
the astronomical alternative, the suggestion might not seem so
strange.
If there is time to ponder, and if unacceptable risks are not
imminent, a ‘surprise attack’ ought not to lead to accidental war. If
however the issue at stake is seen to be a vital matter such as the
imminent loss of nuclear control, command and communications,
then:
Although many authors assume a particularly cautious and
sober behavior in this type of situation, the findings of
comparative research on international crises ... do not give many
reasons for optimism. There is always a grave risk of suboptimal
behavior. What this means in practice is easy to realize:
miscalculation, false perceptions, and all sorts of inappropriate
reactions.
The second assumption of the story, then, appears to be defensible.
Would a limited nuclear exchange remain limited? This question
have been the subject of much discussion and literature, the upshot
of which is that nobody knows. On the one hand historical precedent
might lead one to suppose that in a no-win situation even a modicum
of rationality would immediately bring a mistaken exchange to a halt.
On the one hand, once triggered, the nuclear-exchange situation
seems to be uniquely unstable. Certainly the idea of limited nuclear
war was always been rejected in Soviet Circles, the late L. Brezhnev,
for example, stating that ‘if nuclear war breaks out in Europe or
elsewhere, it will necessarily and unavoidably become universal’.
Pringe and Arkin, in their study of SIOP (single integrated
operational plan), conclude that ‘In the present SIOP only one choice
before the President is still convincing. That choice is the Major
Attack Option’. And Steinbruner considers that if war appeared
unavoidable, military commanders would put irresistible pressure on
political leaders to get missiles away whatever prior policy may have
been. It seems that the Secretary’s controlled response’ carries the
risk of uncontrolled escalation.
Between them, the USA and USSR occupy about one-seventeenth of
the surface area of the Earth. The number of targets which could be
termed ‘strategic’ in each territory is probably several thousand.
Siberia, for example, is now dotted with new cities and industrial
complexes. If a single missile of Tunguska proportions or greater
now brings in with it the risk of ‘nuclear error’, then a story like the
one above may be enacted once every three or four thousand years.
For a male in a western society, the probability of this event
happening within his lifetime is not too different from say the
probability that he will die of lung cancer. It is interesting to compare
this with the other nuclear risks which Frei and Christian, rather
boldly, tried to quantify. They estimated the probabilities that a
major nuclear war would be launched within five years, under
‘normal’ conditions, due to the following factors:
assuming that, given the impact(s), the risk of misinterpretation and
counterstrike is high. The risk that nuclear war would be accidentally
triggered through one or more large impacts would seem on this
evidence to be at the level of about 2 percent within a lifetime.
There are, of course, very large uncertainties in all these estimates,
and the object of the scenario is not to put forward a particular view
so much as to draw attention to what seems to be a largely
unrecognized hazard. It may be more likely than not that a huge
impact or even a swarm would immediately be recognized as such.
And even if not, perhaps calm and rational minds would prevail in
the minutes following catastrophe. But we should at least be aware of
the risk. As Frei and Christian put it, there are ‘monumental gaps of
knowledge which have to be filled by speculation. Yet, as this
speculation pertains to deadly risks, it would certainly be unwise to
dismiss the more ‘pessimistic’ conclusions our of hand. Dangers
which are conceivable in principle are also possible in practice’.
Once the problem is recognized, the cure is, in principle, achievable
by a mere technical fix, an extra layer inserted into the decisionmaking structure. Technical solutions for the larger impact hazards,
however, are less easily found.
URBAN IMPACT
Let us adopt the ‘random-impact’ picture in which the possibility of
bunched impacts is neglected, and take the conservative ‘baseline’
rate of one impact on Earth, of 10 megatons energy or greater, per
200 years. There is then an expectation of about 25 such impacts
over 5,000 years, about 7 of which are on land. Cities of more than a
million inhabitants presently occupy about 500,000 square
kilometers (surprisingly, missile silo fields take up about half this
area). A direct hit on a city will occur, then, with only 2.5 percent
probability over 5,000 years or, within a human lifetime, with only
about 0.03 percent probability. These are reassuringly small figures.
However, inhabited areas occupy much more space than cities alone.
The present world population density is only about 10 per square
kilometer but of course varies from nil for the ocean surface, to 80
for western Europe and about 400 per square kilometer for say the
UK and Netherlands. Of course, the city concentrations are much
higher, Manhattan having about 25,000 people to the square
kilometre for example. Furthermore these population densities are
increasing rapidly. Whereas 2,000 years ago the human population
of the Earth was about 250 million, by 1963 it was three billion,
fifteen years later (1978) it was 4.1 billion, and predictions for AD
2000 range from 4.5 to 7.6 billion (the United Nations official
forecast being 6.7 billion).
For an impact on a fairly average town-and-country population
numbering 100 inhabitants to the square kilometre, about a million
people would be within 30 miles of ground zero. It is likely that a
Tunguska impact would promptly kill most of them: the damage
done to central Belgium as described in the opening scenario was
based on simple extrapolation of nuclear weapons studies. With the
figures adopted, such an urban impact is expected two or three times
within 5,000 years or, within a human lifetime, with about 3 percent
probability. These are still reassuringly small rates although we shall
see that they may have to be revised substantially upwards in the
light of various factors. However, when we come to impacts with
energies around a thousand megatons, a different story emerges.
COSMIC SWARMS
The Earth and lunar cratering rates are in rough agreement.
However, these rates are averages; they tell us nothing about the
present-day impact hazard, and they might conceal brief periods
when the impact rate was enhanced, perhaps enormously so. Scaling
up from a few Earth craters effectively programs swarms out of the
calculation. The situation for the lunar cratering is even worse, since
the computed yield is an average taken over the age of the lunar
surface, about 4 billion years.
There are in fact indications that the population of interplanetary
bodies generally is currently much higher than the cratering record
indicates. For example the arrival rate of small bodies which burn up
in the atmosphere is 10-100 times higher than one would expect
from the crater production rate. This estimate is possible because
over the last twenty years Continent-wide networks of all-sky
cameras, covering almost a million square miles of sky, have been
recording meteoric events. One of the largest fireballs measured over
this period had half a megaton of kinetic energy and burned up over
the South Atlantic. This is about 25 times the explosive energy of the
Hiroshima bomb and illustrates that the upper atmosphere shields
us from most impacts in this Tow energy’ range. The protection does
not extend above a few megatons. This high fireball rate is consistent
with the general overabundance of meteoroids in the inner planetary
system, as manifested, for example, by the Stohl stream, and with the
fact that Apollo asteroids appear to be several, possibly many, times
overabundant in relation to the lunar cratering.
However, even the modern fireball rate tells us nothing about the
prospect of a swarm of Tunguska-like missiles: one might as well try
to infer the occurrence of a fireball storm from an average night’s
meteor observing. Over and above any temporary enhancement of
the ‘baseline’ impact probability, say over the last few thousand
years, there is the evidence for strong bunching of impacts, such as
the 1975 lunar-impact event, when for a few days the Moon was
bombarded at several hundred times the background rate, and the
occasional mention of daytime fireball swarms by the Chinese
chroniclers. To proceed, we have to consider not only what factors
might enhance the impact hazard overall but also what might cause
impacts to bunch briefly in time. That is, we need to apply a realistic
astronomical model. It is at this stage that an understanding of our
Galactic and Solar System environments becomes crucial.
From the Sun’s current position in the Galaxy it is clear that the
impact rate at the present time must be exceptionally high. If Earth
history is episodic due to passage through spiral arms, then the Sun’s
position at the inner edge of the Orion spiral arm ensures that we are
currently in an active phase. Further, the Solar System has just
passed through the plane of the Galaxy, where the tidal stresses
acting on the comet cloud are at their maximum; the comet flux is
therefore near a strong peak of its galactic cycle. It has also recently
passed through Gould’s Belt and is therefore undergoing an
exceptional tidal stress due to a recent passage through an old,
disintegrating molecular cloud. Specifically, although the detailed
modeling is uncertain, there is good evidence that only a few million
years ago the Sun passed through the Scorpio-Centaurus association,
a group of young, hot blue stars and massive nebulae belonging to
the Gould’s Belt complex. This encounter must have created a sharp
impact episode, within which we are still immersed, most of the
flooding of the Solar System taking place within a few million years
of the encounter.
Evidently then, the Solar System is currently in a very noisy galactic
neighbourhood: we are in an impact episode now, just past the peak
of a strong galactic cycle, whose effect has been enhanced by a recent
disturbance due to passage through a massive nebula. Conservatively
speaking, it is likely that the impact rate over the past two or three
million years has been several times higher than one might expect
just by looking at the lunar craters. This is consistent with the
evidence on the ground in the form of recent impact craters and
recently disturbed geology. It is also consistent with the fact that the
current population of Earth-crossing asteroids would yield too high
an impact rate on the Moon to be consistent with the observed
number of craters.
Even within a bombardment episode however, giant comets are
around for say only 10 percent of the time. Overall, a giant comet
may therefore orbit within the inner Solar System for only a few
percent or so of the time. At one extreme then, it these great bodies
are the prime suppliers of missiles, the impact rate averaged over the
last 50,000 years say could be as much as a hundred times the rate
averaged over the history of the Earth.
If that situation pertains now a number of interesting consequences
follow. Adopting our baseline rate, an impact like the Giordano
Bruno one would take place on Earth once in 200,000 years; within
the timescale of civilization, there is then only a 2.5 percent
probability that such a collision would have occurred on Earth or
Moon. However with a rate momentarily 100 times higher, the
probability becomes 92 percent. Far from being a remote statistical
fluke, the lunar impact of AD 1178 becomes a not unreasonable
expectation. This enormously enhanced risk, persisting for only a few
tens of thousands of years, would not greatly affect the long-term
average impact rate as deduced from the lunar cratering.
It also follows that Tunguska-like impacts occurring at a hundred
times their long-term average rate would yield a current average rate
of one impact every other year. These would not in fact occur every
other year, but would rather be confined to those brief periods when
the Earth intersected the orbit of the comet; further, should the
creation of boulders take place by the disintegration of large bodies,
Tunguska-sized boulders would then exist, temporarily, in swarms,
and impacts would occur primarily when the Earth encountered a
swarm. The hazard would be greatest at one or two particular times
of the year, for a period of few centuries, interspersed with calm
periods lasting for a millennium or so. Thus there would be many
years when nothing happened, and one year when the Earth was
intensely bombarded over a few days or hours.
The detailed profile of swarm encounters is determined by factors
such as the rate at which the orbits of the debris precess in space, the
thickness of the ‘meteor’ stream, the mass distribution of boulders
and so on. Suppose, for example, that the impact rate is currently ten
times above the lunar average, and is concentrated in brief bursts
when Earth and swarm intersect. Then one finds that a full-blown
cosmic swarm would be expected about once in 5,000 years and
would comprise an impact of at least 10,000 megatons energy, half a
dozen impacts of at least 1,000 megatons, 40 of at least 100
megatons and 250 impacts of at least 10 megatons energy. Our
opening scenario is a good deal more modest than this.
That such encounters could happen is not to say that they would
happen: the argument so far is one of consistency rather than proof.
What physical factors might in reality cause boulders to concentrate
in swarms rather than, say, be spread uniformly throughout the
inner planetary system? A picture is emerging of cometary asteroids
as rapidly disintegrating, short-lived balls of dust loosely held
together by a ‘glue’ of ice; this ‘dustball’ constitution applies too to
many meteor particles of probable cometary origin. As heat
percolates into the interior, the body becomes more fragmented until
it is unable to hold itself together against any small collision.
Development of cracks and fissures is likely throughout the interior
as the asteroid weakens; in the presence of slight inhomogeneities
such cracks may penetrate 100 metres into the body, and may lead to
disintegration of some comets into may fragments of this size at the
end of their active lives.
It is likely too that these boulders and cometary asteroids are
shortlived. The outgassing observed from the kilometre-sized object
Oljato is such that it would last only about 100,000 years before
vanishing altogether. A body of similar structure and size 0.1
kilometre, capable of yielding a 50-megaton impact, would last only
5,000 years. There is scarcely time therefore for at least the smaller
asteroids to spread away from the Taurid stream before wholesale
disintegration is under way; small bodies are therefore likely to be
concentrated in the Encke stream. Swarms such as the lunar one may
exist for only a few centuries before they disperse along the orbit and
it is likely that there exists, within the Taurid stream, an
undiscovered asteroid in process of breaking up. It could be up to 30
kilometres across and still have escaped detection. It could also be
the prime hazard facing civilization.
In summary, there are many factors which make it likely that
devastating impacts are bunched into brief periods of high risk
interspersed with longer quiet periods. Tunguska-sized impacts must
follow the galactic trend of the large crater-forming ones, so creating
periods of high and low risk depending on the galactic environment;
within an impact episode the risk is higher if there is a giant comet
around, and higher again on those occasions when its orbit intersects
that of the Earth; and if large boulders do form in swarms, then
during close encounters with the comet or its degassed remnant
there is a risk of occasional bombardment on a scale comparable
with that of a nuclear war.
Under these circumstances, of course, a re-examination of the
mythological and early historical data becomes that much more
critical. Even at the conservative baseline impact rate, Tunguskas
strike on average every few centuries; 5 or 6 such isolated impacts
should have taken place since the time of Christ, with an excellent
chance that one of them had an energy of several hundred megatons.
The occurrence of Tunguska-like impacts in recorded history is
therefore expected. In fact, with the temporarily enhanced Tunguska
flux implied by the incidence of giant comets and the production of
swarms, one can only avoid a sequence of virtually annual impacts
(not observed!) by having long periods of quiescence interspersed
with brief periods of multiple bombardment. Thus we expect a Dark
Age within the last two thousand years. Probably, we had a very near
miss at the beginning of the present millennium. The future is
equally secure.
COSMIC WINTER
In our scenario we assumed that above a certain energy threshold, so
much dust is lofted into the atmosphere that a major climatic
catastrophe follows. It takes surprisingly little energy to produce this
effect. The application of only 100 megatons or so of energy with 100
percent efficiency would lift enough fine dust from ground level into
the stratosphere to block out sunlight altogether for as long as the
dust remained. A large explosion in which some correspondingly
smaller fraction of the energy went into lofting dust, or multiple
explosions, would therefore have the same effect. This incidentally is
a major difficulty with the simple ‘dust blocks sunlight’ thesis of the ‘
giant meteorite kills dinosaur’ school. Brief stratospheric dusting
must have happened many hundreds of times throughout the history
of life and cannot therefore be a prime cause of the mass extinction
of the dinosaurs. Prolonged dusting from cometary breakup, coupled
with worldwide conflagration and blast from cosmic swarms which
may include huge asteroids, are another matter. We examine here
the relationship between cosmic dust input and climatic disaster.
In 1977, the American astronomer Kowal discovered a faint object
which, although it left a short asteroid-like trail on a photographic
plate, did not lie in the asteroid belt. Kowal’s object (now named
Chiron after one of the Centaurs known for his wisdom and
goodness) turned out later to be a huge comet in a chaotic, unstable
orbit between Saturn and Uranus. Analysis of the orbit shows that
the comet passes close to these planets from time to time, having had
a close encounter with Saturn in the seventeenth century. During
such strong encounters the course of the comet cannot be predicted
with accuracy and its orbital history is not well known. Statistical
predictions can be made, however, and it turns out that the mean
lifetime of Chiron in its present orbit is about 100,000 years,
although it could persist for a much longer or much shorter time.
When the comet is eventually expelled from this zone, there is a 20
percent probability that it will be thrown into interstellar space, and
an 80 percent probability that it will be thrown into the region of the
inner planets.
Now 100,000 years is a very brief span in relation to the age of the
Solar System (4.5 billion years) and even when it was discovered, it
was thought most unlikely that we were seeing a satellite newly flung
out from the Saturnian system, or an escaping main-belt asteroid.
Thus there are only about a dozen asteroids larger than Chiron,
which is 250 kilometres in diameter, and the probability that we
should be observing one in the act of escaping was very remote. The
chaotic orbit, and recent discovery of a coma indicate however that
we are dealing with a comet. On the other hand, with Chiron a
comet, it is a truly exceptional body, with something like a hundred
times the mass of the comet Encke progenitor, and an 80 percent
probability of finding itself in a short-period orbit within 100,000
years. Such an enormous body, disintegrating into dust and asteroids
over some thousands of years, would be an awesome sight. But also,
it could hardly fail to create a severe climatic trauma — probably an
ice age — and a great mass extinction of life would then be
unavoidable. It is probably rather fortuitous that Chiron has gone
undiscovered for as long as it has, and there are probably not too
many Chiron-sized objects waiting in the wings, but a very large
population of smaller bodies could well exist, undetected, in the
Saturn-Uranus region. Because of our complete ignorance of the size
of this population, the hazard is hard to assess and is best judged on
the rate at which new comets seem to be entering the short-period
population at the present time. A large uncertainty goes with the
resulting estimate. But it seems that, on a timescale of 500 years,
there is about a 1 percent risk that another comet, sufficiently large
to pose a major threat to civilization, will enter into an Apollo or
short-period orbit. The hazard posed by a fresh giant comet entering
the Earth’s environment is therefore reassuringly small. A much
more immediate dust hazard, we shall see, is that posed by the
cometry debris already here.
The largest single impact discussed in our story was 1,500 megatons.
Even taking an average impact rate say as found from the lunar
cratering, thus ignoring the evidence that we are now in a period of
enhanced risk, there is a reasonable prospect of such an impact over
historical timescales. An impact of this energy would result from a
body of mass about 13 million tons coming in at 30 kilometres per
second. The atmosphere would ablate an outer skin from the body
but would be quite unable to stop the bulk of it hitting the ground.
Given the fragile and fluffy composition of cometary material and the
energy of the impact, the bolide would immediately disintegrate, any
part of it going unvaporized being broken into its constituent
interstellar dust particles, which may be about 0.15 microns in
diameter: this material would be entrained in the fireball.
In the event of a land impact, the comet fragment would excavate a
crater. Experience with surface nuclear bursts 131 indicates that
something like a third of a million tons of dust is raised for every
megaton of explosion energy. The figure is probably roughly
applicable to an impact but may be a few times higher because of the
energies involved in an explosion as gigantic as the one we are
considering. In the case of the nuclear explosion, a few percent of
this dust is made up of sub-micron sized particles, much of it formed
by the condensation of vaporized material. To what extent an impact
would be comparable with the nuclear explosion is very uncertain
(the temperatures reached in an impact are lower but persist longer)
and it is not obvious that the nuclear case can be applied unmodified
to the impact one. Limited evidence suggests that, out of the ground,
something like the mass of the projectile will be excavated in the
form of sub-micron particles, and probably several times this
amount is produced as vapour condensates. Overall, perhaps 400-
2,400 million tons of dust may be generated by the collision, 40-240
million tons of which is in the dangerous sub-micron form. All of the
fine material will be entrained in the fireball.
The huge fireball would be too energetic to be contained by the
atmosphere. Laden with dust, it would rise upwards at several
kilometers per second, incidentally creating powerful winds which
themselves sweep up material. Within minutes it would soar to an
altitude of several hundred kilometers, in the high stratosphere.
Here it stabilizes, and the dust spills outwards.
Closer to the ground, the intense heat of impact would generate fires
over a wide area. About 40 percent of the land surface is forestcovered, and the same again is brushwood, grass and so on. About
one-third of the area of the USA is flammable in the summer, for
example. A 1,500-megaton impact on a forested region would
probably create several hundred fires over an area of 400,000 square
kilometers. Depending on cloud cover (clouds might enhance the
heat through reflecting the radiation), dryness of the ground and so
on, it is possible that these would merge into a single forest fire about
800 kilometres (500 miles) across. Everything combustible along the
line of sight of the initial fireball would catch fire and the extent of
the conflagration would be limited essentially by the curvature of the
horizon. (Prompt loss of life over this area would presumably be
considerable.) Adopting figures which have been used to analyze the
‘nuclear winter’ scenario, one finds that something like 40-50 million
tons of smoke would be produced, the smoke particles having
diameters about 0.1 micron. Plumes of smoke would rise up to 10
kilometres (7 miles) into the atmosphere.
The situation we have described — some tens of millions of tons of
sub-micron dust lofted into the high stratosphere, and similar mass
of smoke pouring into the lower atmosphere, is very similar to that
envisaged in the nuclear winter studies, in which the after-effects of
smoke and dust from a nuclear exchange, ranging from 100 to
10,000 megatons, are considered. This is a fortiori true if the Earth
encounters a cosmic swarm. The general similarity is not surprising,
given that both situations involve the sudden release of comparable
amounts of energy. There are, however, significant differences:
1. Some tens of millions of tons of the comet material is in the
form of fragile, sub-micron sized particles ready made for
separation and lofting upwards.
2. A single large impact throws a greater proportion of material,
higher into the stratosphere, than an equivalent number of
smaller explosions.
3. An impact fireball differs in several ways form a nuclear one;
it is not clear what effect this has on estimates of dust
production.
4. Nuclear war scenarios envisage urban targets with high
concentrations of flammable material; a random impact is more
likely to strike forest or brush.
It should be emphasized again that great uncertainties attend all
these attempts to calculate the dust injection, mainly because of the
absence of trials in the field. Arguments have been given for both
higher and lower dust inputs in the nuclear winter case. Overriding
such uncertainties is the certainly that impacts of vastly greater
energy will take place from time to time. From time to time,
therefore, Nature will generate its own nuclear winter. Overall it
seems likely that during a period of a few thousand years, there is an
expectation of an impact, possibly occurring as part of a swarm of
material, sufficiently powerful to plunge us into a dark age.
The consideration is that if, as we propose, ancient tales are a valid
guide to events in the prehistoric past, then some mention of a
climatic glitch should be preserved in the tales of celestial battle. In
fact they are, and they are preserved in localities which might be
expected to have suffered most from brief, sudden coolings. Myths
from Iranian highlands and the central Asian Altai tell of a golden
age which was terminated by a life-destroying cold. In Icelandic
myth, for example, one finds the fimbulvetr, a terrible winter
associated with Ragnarok, the final battle of the gods. In this
prophesy of world-end, based apparently on a story lost in time,
familiar elements appear: there is the terrible battle of the gods,
Odin, Thor and others, accompanied by blazing hosts — the
Valkyries, the ‘children of darkness, the doom-bringers, offspring of
monsters’, the sons of Muspell etc. The world ash Yggdrasil, about
which the sky rotates, trembles, while:
Earth sinks in the sea, the sun turns black.
Cast down from Heaven are the hot stars.
Fumes reek, into flames burst.
The sky itself is scorched with fire
and so on. The world ends with snows and terrible winds, or three
winters without a summer depending on the source, and there is
reference also to an earthquake coupled with the fimbulvetr. It may
be that such tales do indeed provide a record of a minor, aborted
cosmic winter associated with the fireball swarm.
When the dust finally clears, would the climate return to normal?
Consider the following sequence of events: suppose, first, that the
freezing after an impact is such that large areas of the planet remain
snow-covered throughout a summer. With the onset of winter, this
snow cover thickens. By the following summer, with dust still
suspended in the stratosphere in middle and high latitudes, the snow
is too thick to melt; in the following winter it is added to and so on.
When eventually, the dust clears, the land masses of the northern
hemisphere are covered in a snowfield which, reflecting sunlight
back into space, has become permanent. The snowfield is added to
each year until, within a millennium or two, Europe and North
America are again covered in ice sheets a kilometre thick, the ocean
level has dropped by 50 or 100 metres, and the Earth is locked into a
new ice age. Quite a small lowering of temperature, say about 2° or
3° C for some years, would at the present day be enough to cover
much of northern Canada, especially Baffin Island (over 1,000 miles
long), with permanent snow. This in turn would create a cold trough,
triggering further cooling and snow over Quebec province to the
south (which is largely a high plateau), leading down to the region of
New York and the Great Lakes. Once such a feedback got going, it is
difficult to see what could stop it.
Whether a new ice age could be triggered by a super-Tunguska
impact, acting singly or as part of a swarm, we do not know.
Simulation of the mechanism is very complicated because of the
many unknowns, and few studies of the problem have been carried
out. It turns out that much depends on the amount of sea ice which
would form, and where it would drift to. But the movement of the sea
ice depends on prevailing winds and sub-surface ocean currents,
each of which would themselves be strongly affected by the cooling.
Penetration of this ice into middle latitudes would extend cold
atmospheric troughs southwards, further enhancing the cold in these
latitudes. The amount of sunlight reflected back into space from
snow-covered forests is another uncertain factor. High latitude cloud
cover — another unknown — must also play its part. It is not
surprising, given all the uncertainties, that the few mathematical
studies which have been carried out on the problem have given
widely different answers. To the question, could a super-Tunguska
impact bigger plunge the Earth into a new ice age, the only secure
answer at present is that we do not know.
We anticipate nevertheless that over and above ice ages, brief
episodes of glacial severity will occur at intervals of a few thousand
years throughout the few million years of a bombardment episode.
These episodes will be marked by abruptness of onset (years rather
than millennia). Recovery may well be slowed down by feedback
effects. Possibly, even, the Earth will not recover at all, and will be
suddenly plunged into an ice age. We should look for these cosmic
winters, brief but traumatic coolings between the great glaciations, in
the geological record.
They are, in fact, there. In 1972 Dansgaard and his
colleagues 132 pointed out that the oxygen isotope ‘thermometer’ of
the last 125,000 years reveals a number of brief, but sudden and
drastic, coolings. These are seen in figure 20. These authors,
referring to the event of 90,000 years ago, state that ‘within 100 yr
the climate changed from warmer than today into full glacial severity
... the drop (in temperature) might have occurred almost
instantaneously ... it took 1,000 yr to recover from this catastrophic
event.’ The temperature drop involved may have been 5-8° C. The
same authors also claim that the ending of the last glaciations 10,700
years ago may have come with similar remarkable abruptness,
perhaps within 20 years, coinciding with a sharp decline in the
concentration of dust in the glacial ice. There may well have been
more such events, since anything of less than about 100 years’
duration is liable to be missed altogether in the oxygen isotope
record. For example the record covering the last 10,000 years looks
quite innocuous, but history tells us otherwise.
Figure 20. An early temperature record of the last major
glaciations, after Dansgaard and his colleagues, from a study of
cores extracted from the Greenland ice cap. According to the
theory described here, this is essentially a record of
stratospheric dusting due to material from the progressively
disintegrating Comet Encke progenitor. Note the rapid
flickering, the suddenness of onset of individual ‘flickers’, each a
cosmic winter, and the rapidity with which the ice age ended.
These sudden changes are not consistent with slow orbital and
polar variations as the prime movers, but are expected on the
giant comet picture.
Fossil pollen provides a record of the prevailing type of vegetation,
and hence the climate, in a given locality. In the southern Vosges in
France there is a peat bog, the Grande Pile, which yields undisturbed
layers of sedimentation laid down, 5 years to a millimetre, since
before the last ice age. The palaeobotanist Woillard 133 found that
every interglacial period which she studied in detail ended abruptly;
that is, each glacial episode was sudden in onset. The earliest of these
‘cold snaps’ is shown in detail in figure 21. Over a period of about 150
years there is a steady cooling and then, suddenly, the temperate
forest of the region — oak, alder and fir trees — is replaced by pine,
birch and spruce, sub-Arctic forest found nowadays in the north of
Scandinavia. This happened within twenty years. However because
the growth time of trees is of this order, the actual transition of
climate may have taken place much more rapidly and could, in fact,
have been nearly instantaneous. The mean temperature drop over
the northern hemisphere was probably about 5° C. similar results
have been obtained by others, looking at other slices of time.
Figure 21. Fossil pollen record in a European peat bog, after G.
Woillard. Time moves from right to left and a 300-year period is
covered. The extreme left of the record shows a sudden but
lasting change in forest composition, from predominatly fir to a
colder birch and pine. This sudden cooling of the European
climate might have been caused by a stratospheric dusting, from
impact or meteoric dust, causing a climatic instability and a
change in ocean circulation patterns.
The geological evidence then, seems to agree reasonably well with
the astronomical expectations: at intervals of a few thousand years
(sometimes more and sometimes less) the planet is abruptly plunged
into a glacial climate which may last for a few, a hundred or
thousand years, or which may even lock the Earth into an ice age,
from which only slow orbital changes would free it.
What would happen if there were a brief blockage of sunlight, lasting
even for the few months or years it would take micron-sized dust
particles to settle out of the stratosphere? This question has been
asked in a nuclear war context, but the results of the climatic and
biological studies are probably roughly applicable to the present
situation. An important difference is that, whereas in the nuclearwar situation smoke might be scavenged out from the lower
atmosphere in a few weeks, in the cosmic case the stratospheric dust
would linger. Based on these studies, it seems that a significant
cosmic encounter, enough to reduce sunlight to a few percent of its
normal value, would precipitate a rapid plunge to sub freezing
temperatures (say - 30° C or colder) in continental regions.
Freshwater rivers and lakes would freeze over. With the extreme cold
would come storms of unprecedented intensity, especially near
continental edges. It would be difficult to see even by day, and
photosynthesis would come to a halt. The dust raised by one or more
large impacts, even if initially confined to one hemisphere, would
within a few months spread to the other, and soon the effects would
be global. The effect on ecosystems would depend on the time of
year. An encounter in the summer, corresponding both to the
growing season and to passage through the Beta Taurids, would wipe
out commercial agirculture for the rest of that year. Thus a drop of
only 2° to 5° C in the northern hemisphere — no more than one
observes in the pollen record — would substantially cut wheat and
corn production, and might wipe out rice production in Asia. In this
situation much of the human race would be wiped out too, and one
would not expect civilization to recover for, probably, centuries. A
full-blown ice age would of course end civilization in any form we
now recognize.
There is a well-known theory, associated with the Yugoslavian Earth
scientist M. Milankovitch, according to which ice ages are caused by
slow cyclic changes in the Earth’s orbit. These changes cause the
amount of solar energy reaching the land masses of the northern
hemisphere to vary. It is likely that orbital evolution does indeed
affect the strength of glaciations, but unlikely that it is the prime
cause. The cyclic variations have been going on continuously
throughout Earth history but the ice ages are intermittent. Some
additional factor must have triggered the onset of the last ice age, for
example. And of course the sudden coolings, usually only years in
onset, cannot be explained by orbital cycles which are measured in
tens of thousand of years. Looking at figure 20, one may ask why the
planet recovered from some abrupt coolings, but not from others. It
is likely that, during a comet shower, impacts are continually dusting
the Earth, in combination with comet dust. But it is only when the
orbital conditions are right that the runaway instability sets in, and
the Earth ices over. Calculations show that these orbital conditions
exist now.
COSMIC DUST
There is a crucial test for the ideas developed here. 134 If Encke’s
Comet in its giant phase truly flooded the stratosphere with dust,
then that dust should still be identifiable in deposits on Earth. An
ideal place to look for the comet dust would be deep within the polar
ice caps. Snow falling in these regions becomes compacted into ice,
which is laid down typically at a few centimeters a year, and once
deposited, is likely to remain undisturbed for the lifetime of the ice
cap. Dust, trickling down from above, will become entrained in the
ice. We should look for comet dust, laid down in quantities large
enough to block out the Sun, and identifiable with the material of
Encke’s Comet.
Now ice cores, some of them over a kilometre deep, have been
extracted from several locations — Byrd Station at the south pole,
Camp Century in the north of Greenland, and so on. It has been
known for some years that there is an excess concentration of very
small particles, many of them sub-micron sized, laid down during
the last ice age (figure 22). Over the period around 20,000 to 10,000
BC, during the most recent ice age, the dust concentration seems to
be at least ten times higher than the post-ice-age levels. In fact, so
much dust was laid down over this period that, if indeed it entered
through the high stratosphere, the sky would have been densely
veiled, polar sunlight being reduced to a fraction of its present-day
level. Of course the effect of a permanent dust veil in the atmosphere
is more extreme in polar regions, where the Sun is never very high
above the horizon and sunlight has a long path to traverse through
the atmosphere. The dust concentration is about that expected on
the comet disintegration hypothesis.
Figure 22. Typical depositions of sub-micron dust particles in
polar regions during glacial and post-glacial times (due to
Thompson and Mosley-Thompson, ‘Microparticle concentration
variations’). Note the enhanced dust levels during the last ice
age. A significant proportion of this material seems to be
cometary in origin.
There is, however, a hidden assumption in this line of argument. It
could be that snow was precipitated at a different rate during the last
ice age. If the annual snowfall at the poles was only a tenth of its
present rate, then a steady background trickle of dust would become
concentrated in the ice without, however, ever having been
concentrated in the atmosphere. Fortunately, there are annual
variations in the dust concentration, and these can be counted, much
like counting tree rings, to give an absolute chronology. These counts
show that the timescale shown in the figure is about right. Evidence
covering the last 20,000 years, then, seems to show that the polar
caps at least were unusually dusty places. Some proportion of this
material must be volcanic in origin and some must be wind-blown
continental dust (it is likely that the polar regions were windier
places than they are now). However the deposition rates at opposite
ends of the Earth are surprisingly close, although the distribution of
land masses in the two hemispheres is very different.
In an investigation carried out in 1983, the American LaViolette
analysed samples of ice from the Camp Century ice core. The
technique used, neutron-activation analysis, allows certain elements
to be detected in parts per billion. High iridium levels were found in
all the samples examined: we are dealing, probably, with cosmic
dust. The levels corresponded to deposition rates 10 to 60 times
greater than those of the present day. LaViolette found also that the
dust had a very unusual chemical composition; and at particular
levels in the ice, the over-abundances of several elements jumped by
large amounts. At one level the concentration of tin jumped by over
27,000 times and silver by over 200 times. It is very unlikely that
this is ordinary meteoritic material since there appeared to be
particles hundreds of times richer in tin, antimony, silver and gold
than ordinary meteorites. It is very unlikely too that this material
came from Earth: for example the tin is over 100,000 times more
concentrated than the ordinary material of the Earth’s crust.
LaViolette pointed out that ‘If this material is of extraterrestrial
origin, its source must be different from that of the majority of
meteoritic material.’
If this is material from Encke’s Comet, and if a fragment of that
comet struck the Central Siberian Plateau in 1908, then any
surviving cosmic material from the impact site ought to have the
same strange chemical composition as the stuff laid down in the ice
caps between ten and twenty thousand years ago. No visible debris
was left after that collision. However, under the pressure of the
fireball and the subsequent fallout, Tunguska material was
impregnated into the peat moss of the area. The Russian Golenetskii
and his colleagues have recovered such material and investigated its
chemical composition. Their technique was to extract peat cores
from the central regions of the impact site, dry them and burn them
in a furnace in contamination-free conditions. The final step was a
theoretical one, in which an attempt was made to allow for the
preferential escape of more volatile elements under the intense heat
of the fireball: this last step is the most uncertain, but should give
results at least roughly correct. The pre-entry composition of the
Tunguska body, it turns out, shows many peculiarities according to
Soviet investigators: ‘the content of many elements in it differs from
their average abundances in the earth’s crust, meteorites, and the
solar system as a whole’. In particular, there were great overabundances of tin, silver and antimony.
Figure 23. (a) Nickel-iridium ration for small dust particles laid
down on Greenland over the period 19,700-14,200 BP (filled
circles), and from microparticles found at the site of the
Tunguska explosion of AD 1908. Both these elements are found
in cosmic particles. The good fit of both sources on to the line
may imply a common progenitor body, as anticipated from the
theory, (b) Comparison of abundances of various elements form
the Greenland ice particles and from the Tunguska particles.
Material in the box had the ‘universal composition’ found in
unprocessed astronomical bodies. Both dust deposits have
identical anomalies relative to the mix — large overabundances
of tin (Sn), silver (Ag), Caesium (Cs) and antimony (Sb) — again
consistent with a common source, and hence a cometary origin
of the Greenland dust.
Putting these two studies together, we find the results shown in
figure 23. There are caveats. Only trace amounts of elements are
being measured, and even with the greatest care contamination of
samples is possible: the problem has plagued polar research for the
past twenty years. Further, the pre-fireball composition of the
Tunguska object had to be inferred from the surviving remnants.
However it would be very strange if all these effects had conspired to
yield identical fictitious anomalies, and we are therefore inclined,
pending further measures, to accept the results. The conclusion is
remarkable: within the errors, the dust extracted from 10,000-yearold ice a kilometre down in the Greenland ice cap, and that extracted
from the moss of the 1908 Siberian impact, have the same exotic
chemistry. One should keep in mind too that each analysis was
carried out without knowledge of the other, and without knowledge
of the astronomical picture we have described. The identity of result
supports the hypothesis that the last ice age was caused by dust from
a large comet whose debris is still in orbit. We conclude that an
encounter with the denser parts of this debris is possible and could
have consequences along the lines discussed in our story.
SUMMARY OF RISK ASSESSMENT
There are three main reasons why the magnitude of the cosmic
impact hazard has not been appreciated until now. First, the average
impact rate in the 10-10,000 megaton range has in the past been
underestimated by a factor of about ten. Second, only the local
effects arising from blast have been contemplated. Third, there is the
new consideration that the impacts may be strongly bunched in time,
on various scales from the geological downwards, so leading to
periods of high risk interspersing low risk. Arguments have been
given to indicate that we are currently in a higher-than-average risk
period. Our ‘best estimates’ of the cosmic hazard are then as follows:
1. The environment of the Earth is substantially more hazardous
than has been realized until now. Several risks — nuclear error,
urban impact, stratospheric dusting — have been identified.
2. These risks are measured at an average level of a few per cent
within a human lifetime, but in reality they may be concentrated
into brief catastrophic periods in which multiple impacts occur.
3. Especially given the sensitivity of modern agricultural systems
to temperature and the arrival of the Beta Taurids in the
northern hemisphere growing season, the prospect of global
catastrophe from stratospheric dusting appears to be the
greatest natural hazard. 135
4. These hazards are substantial when considered on the
timescale of human civilization: should they materialize,
civilization might be plunged into a new Dark Age, and it is even
possible that the human race would come to an end.
Epilogue
It is the fate of all species to become extinct and most manlike
species have already done so. Over and above extinction, large
population fluctuations take place in nature, sometimes within a few
years. The controlling factor is often climate, and Earth’s climate, in
turn, can be greatly affected by its astronomical surroundings.
The two and a half centuries which lay between the Gervase
chronicle of 1178 and the onset of the Black Death in Europe in 1348
saw ‘an acute crisis developing in human affairs’. One
chronicler 136 at least reports of the most immediate cause of the
plague in 1345 that ‘between Cathay and Persia there rained a vast
plain of fire; falling in flakes like snow and burning up mountains
and plains and other lands, with men and women; and then arose
vast masses of smoke; and whosoever beheld this died within the
space of half a day ...’ there seems little doubt also that a worldwide
cooling of the Earth played a fundamental part in the process. The
Arctic polar cap extended, changing the cyclonic pattern and leading
to a series of disastrous harvests. These in turn led to widespread
famine, death and social disruption. In England and Scotland there
is a pattern of abandoned villages and farms, soaring wheat prices
and falling populations. In Eastern Europe there was a series of
winters of unparalleled severity and depth of snow. The chronicles of
monasteries in Poland and Russia tell of cannibalism, common
graves over-filled with corpses, and migrations to the west. Even
before the Black Death came, then, a human catastrophe of great
proportions was under way in late medieval times. Indeed the cold
snap lasted well beyond the period of the bubonic plague. A number
of such fluctuations are to be found in the historical record, and
there is good evidence that these climatic stresses are connected not
only with famine but also with times of great social unrest, wars,
revolution and mass migrations.
In spite of their traumatic effects, these global coolings probably
amounted to no more that about a degree in average summer
temperatures as compared with today: even relatively minor climatic
effects have had a profound influence on human history. A major
cosmic winter, on the other hand, is likely to produce a rapid global
climatic cooling amounting to several degrees. With the modern
dependence on ‘green revolution’ crops, finely tuned to give a high
yield under a narrow range of climatic conditions, the onset of such a
‘winter’ would cause the population of the world to crash in the
course of a decade, or even a single year. Such events are completely
outside normal experience and their existence is not generally
recognized, even though they represent a hazard vastly more horrific
than any of the more familiar catastrophes such as earthquake,
famine or flood. As we have seen, there is a fair chance that our
planet will be caught in the icy grip of such a cosmic winter at
intervals of a thousand years or so. Lesser catastrophes, little ice ages
in effect, will arise on timescales of a few centuries. At an individual
level, the risk amounts to a few percent within a lifetime. More to the
point, though, civilization is in the presence of a hitherto
unrecognized cosmic phenomenon which could plunge it without
warning into a Dark Age.
What can be done? Unfortunately the extent and epoch of the next
cosmic winter depend for the moment on a number of
imponderables which lie outside the scope of existing knowledge: it
is not now possible to make an accurate assessment of what the
future has in store. This is clearly not a satisfactory state of affairs,
nor can we expect that Nature will hold back on account of our
ignorance or lack of preparedness. However, in view of seriousness
of cosmic winters for human survival, and noting the vast
expenditures to the tune of many billions of dollars on a whole
variety of preparations for all manner of lesser hazards and
calamities, both man-made and natural, disease and nuclear war not
excluded, one must surely note also that not a single cent (or penny!)
of taxpayers’ money is currently devoted to their study.
The first step must therefore be one of exploration. An asteroid in a
Taurid orbit, carrying 100,000 megatons of impact energy, coming
out of the night sky, would be visible in binoculars for about six
hours before impact. By the same time if it was a naked-eye object it
would be at most half an hour from collision. In its final plunge it
would be seen as a brilliant moving object for perhaps 30 seconds.
One needs more time than this to prepare for the winter. A thorough
exploration of the Earth’s surroundings, and the discovery and
tracking of probably tens of thousands of bodies, is therefore a first
requirement. This is technically feasible.
Complementing such an observational programme, a fresh
exploration of the past, aimed with the new astronomical
understandings, is also necessary; not just for its own sake but also
to arrive at a better understanding of the risks. For example one
would like to find physical evidence to confirm or deny an
astronomical catastrophe in the Near East in the second millennium
BC. A search for Tunguska-like material in the Mediterranean sea
bed is one possibility. Evidence for high-temperature effects is
another: the brief thermal pulse from a big fireball would glaze rocks
and create shadow effects, which fire created by straw-burning
invaders would not. A thin layer of soot, arising from extensive
conflagration on open ground, should be present in the strata from
the period. The effects of blast might be distinguished from those of
earthquake by the disposition of fallen debris; and so on. To go from
mere statistical projection to detailed forecasting, then, a generation
of exploration, both of the Earth’s environment and of our history
and prehistory, will be necessary. As we have remarked, such studies
cannot be seen only as an academic game: there is nothing academic
about a 1,000-megaton impact, and the modern prospects for
nuclear error, not to mention nuclear meltdown, exacerbate the
issue.
And if the sirens should sound, what then? It may be marginally
within the capacity of present-day technology to divert a small
asteroid, given enough warning, though not a swarm of them: it
would take a heavy launcher and a hydrogen bomb. But at least,
unlike our forebears, we have a chance to act; we need no longer be
helpless in the hands of the gods. The main problem at the moment
is to be aware that there is a problem.
Three thousand years ago, in accordance with age-old practice, the
kings of Babylon were still employing astronomer-priests to give
warnings of cosmic visitations. A thousand years ago, the emperors
of China were still relying on similar skills, while in Europe the Pope
saw messages in the sky and urged Holy War. But this latter was an
aberration; for the last two and a half thousand years have seen the
decline and fall of the sky gods, and the growing presumption that
the cosmos is stable and regular. The shift of paradigm has been
unconscious, convenient, insidious and thorough. Probably, the
rediscovery of a lost tradition of celestial catastrophe could not have
been made through analysis of ancient texts alone; a key had to be
provided, and it has been, by the paraphernalia of modern science. It
is a salutary lesson both on the capacity of human reasoning to get it
wrong for long periods of time, and on the essential unity of
knowledge.
It would be naive to think, however, that one merely has to point to
deep-seated cracks in the structure of modern knowledge, to have
scholars setting to and constructing a better framework within which
mankind might plan his future. There is considerable intellectual
capital invested in the status quo, enough to ensure that those with
an interest in preserving it, the ‘enlightened’ and the ‘established’,
will continue to present the cosmos to us in a suitably non-violent
form. The history of ideas reveals that some will even go further and
act as a kind of thought police, whipping potential deviants into line.
For them, temporal power takes precedence over the fate of the
species.
There is a need for this book.
Notes
1. Thomas, Religion and the Decline of Magic.
2. Cohn, The Pursuit of the Millennium.
3. Homer, The Iliad.
4. Virgil, The Aeneid.
5. Lucretius, De Rerum Natura, translated by R. E. Latham (Penguin
Classics, 1951), copyright © R. E. Latham, 1951. The italics are ours.
They emphasize specific aspects of the real world which appear to
have been clearly recognized in classical times and which are now
confirmed by modern science, as we shall see.
6. Sybilline Oracles.
7. Seneca, Naturales Quaestivnes. The italics are ours.
8. Tian-shan, ‘Ancient Chinese Observations’ entry no. 39. The
implied date is 22 May 12 BC, the time 3-5 pm. A fou is an
earthenware pot; a zhang is 12 degrees.
9. Savage, The Anglo-Saxon Chronicles.
10. Morris, Historical Tales: the Romance of Reality. This
impressive extract is repeated in the posthoumous publication by
Velikovsky (1982), wherein it is held that mankind is subconsciously
traumatized by past human experience into minimizing or even
trivializing celestial dangers. The alternative explored in this book,
that celestial danger was programmed out of the body of conscious
knowledge for spurious intellectual reasons, has much the same
effect, however.
11. Jacobsen, ‘Mesopotamia’.
12. Frankfort, H. and Frankfort, H. A., Myth and Reality.
13. Davidson, The stars and the Mind.
14. Butterfield, The Origins of History. This study was also published
posthumously but, being incomplete, without the benefit of the
author’s considered conclusion. Nevertheless, the insight emerging
from this historical survey, conducted without any reference to the
recent astronomical findings, suggests a broad concurrence of
outlooks will not be difficult to achieve.
15. Neugebauer, ‘The history of ancient astronomy’.
16. Van der Waerden, Science Awakening II.
17. This understanding of the Universe was perfected during the
subsequent half-millennium, achieving its most purified expression
in Ptolemy, The Almagest. Its purpose cannot be understood
however without reference to Ptolemy, The Tetrabiblos.
18. Whilst it is possible to argue that the interbreeding of
civilizations, arising for example as a consequence of mass
migration, may be the most significant process underlying the course
of history (cf. Darlington, The Evolution of Man), we emphasize here
that particular extreme environmental effects are likely to be more
fundamental.
19. Oates, Babylon.
20. See for example Needham, The Grand Titration.
21. The Chinese astrological record, like its Babylonian predecessor
was put together over a period of nearly two thousand years and was
eventually made known in the west following its translation by the
French physicist, Biot, ‘Catalogue générale des étoiles filantes’. The
record of observed ‘guest stars’ has recently been revised and
updated by Ho, ‘Ancient and medieval observations’, but no
comparable study of ancient meteor observations yet exists. A
considerable understanding of the spirit of astrology in China may be
gained from Schafer, Pacing the Void.
22. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. The author argues
not only that knowledge advances in much the way we have
described, by way of sudden paradigm switches, but also that the
choice of fundamental hypotheses at any one time tends to be
socially motivated and sustained.
23. A landmark in the study of historical climate is provided in the
comprehensive survey by Lamb, Climate: Present, Past and Future.
A detailed study of the evidence relating to recent climatic recessions
is to be found in Grove, The Little Ice Age.
24. See for example Simmons and Tooley, The Environment of
British Prehistory. For a broader perspective, see Goudie,
Environmental Change. The more or less steadily ameliorating postglacial climate suddenly went into decline around 3500-3000 BC
with a sequence of subsequent recoveries and reversals of varying
intensity. This very marked decline was characterized in Britain for
example by a sudden loss of tree cover, changes in vegetation,
widespread evidence of burning revealed by microscopic carbon
particles, and subsequent peat bog formation, a pattern that recurs
to a significant degree in the century or so around 1200 BC. The idea
that these clearances were the work of man has been embraced by
experts unaware of potential natural agencies capable of inducing
fire.
25. Such difficulties of interpretation are now being rapidly solved by
the use of measurements of certain stable and short-lived isotopes
(e.g. 2H, 10Be, 14C, 18O) in minute samples of 'historical’ materials.
Fluctuations in the concentrations of these isotopes evidently
correlate with global climate. Besides revealing major ice ages every
100,000 years or so, these measurements also indicate serious
climatic recessions lasting a century which may be no more than a
millennium apart. The fluctuations during the last 10,000 years
show, in addition, a variety of underlying shorter-period cycles which
seem to be reflected in the Sun’s behavior as well. Unfortunately
there are several possible physical processes capable of producing
the fluctuations and it remains to be established whether the Sun, a
terrestrial reservoir such as the ocean, or a periodic dust source in
interplanetary space, is the primary agent. Nevertheless these cycles
and their explanation are evidently a major key to the long-standing
mystery of the climate and weather, and can be expected to bear
their final fruit in the not-too-distant future. The proceedings of a
Royal Society Discussion Meeting in London during February 1989
provide an up-to-date account of the present state of research in this
field.
26. Renfrew, Before Civilization. For a contrary view by an
archaeologist, attributing to astronomical and environmental factors,
rather than sociological ones, the dominant roles in prehistory, see
McKie , The Megalith Builders. A well-argued commentary on the
‘sociological’ approach of many archaeologists is to be found in
Bradley, The Social Foundations of Prehistoric Britain, which
concludes with the remark ‘It is time that archaeologists accepted
that they can recognize patterns which they had not expected to see’.
27. Wilson, ‘Egypt’. For a definitive study of sacral kingship, see
Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods. Some useful supplementary texts
on ancient Egypt are: Gardiner, Egypt of the Pharaohs; David, Cults
of the Sun and Rundle-Clark, Myth and Symbol.
28. See, for example, Fraser, The Golden Bough, and The New
Larousse Encyclopedia of Mythology. Introducing the latter book,
Robert Graves writes that ‘mythology is the study of whatever
religious or heroic legends are so foreign to a student’s experience
that he cannot believe them to be true. Hence the English adjective
“mythical” meaning “incredible”; and hence the omission from
standard European mythologies, such as this, of the Biblical
narratives even when closely paralleled by myths from Persia,
Babylonia, Egypt and Greece’. We take the view that most cosmic
elements of Biblical narrative and mythology (often referred to as
creation and combat myths) should be understood as deriving from
real though not necessarily comprehended astronomical phenomena.
That this might be so was recognized earlier this century in books by
Bellamy, Moons, Myths and Man, and Velikovsky, Worlds in
Collision, though neither author was able to provide a valid scientific
rationale. Excellent introductions to creation and combat myths are
found in: Blacker and Loewe, Ancient Cosmologies and Forsyth, The
Old Enemy.
29. Plutarch, Concerning Isis and Osiris. Typhon was explicitly
recognized as a comet in late antiquity; of the nine types of comet
described by astrologers such as Lydus (third century AD), one was
‘typhonic’.
30. The determination of absolute chronology in the pre-Christian
era depends on a wide range of studies which we do not attempt to
survey here. Suffice to say that most Near Eastern chronology BC is
currently established through precise cultural and historical
synchronizations with a year-count based on Egyptian king-lists and
the so-called Sothic calendar. Most Central European chronology BC,
on the other hand, is established through intrinsically less precise
carbon-14 synchronizations with a year-count based on
dendrochronological sequences. These independent scales are
apparently in broad agreement to a few percent over 5,000 years
(Mellart, Egyptian and Near Eastern Chronology), but the
possibility of a larger deviation over one or more extended periods
cannot be excluded, especially if ambiguities are still present in the
Egyptian king-lists (cf. Gardiner, Egypt of the Pharaohs, Appendix).
Severe climatic depressions on a global scale (indicated by
concentrations of extremely narrow tree rings within periods of less
than 20 years and by simultaneous acidity peaks due to atmospheric
dust veils) seem to have occurred at epochs: 4375, 3195, 1626, 1150
BC and AD 540 ± 50 years, without a known volcanic association in
every case (cf. Baillie and Munro, ‘Irish tree rings’,); the anticorrelation with known periods of high civilization during protohistory is evidence for a significant role in history on the part of
climate.
31. Kitto, The Greeks. For a lively archaeological snapshot, see Wood,
In search of the Trojan War.
32. Waddell, Manetho.
33. Recent research may be indicating that the epoch of the climatic
depression c. 1625 BC (note 30) coincides with the demise of the
Minoan civilization and is associated with the second rather than the
first Cretan palaces, i.e. all Minoan dates before, say, 1400 BC need
to be set earlier by approximately 75-125 years.
34. Sandars, The Sea Peoples.
35. Graves, Greek Myths. For a review of Hesiod’s sources in
particular, see Walcot, Hesiod and the Near East.
36. Herodotus, The Histories.
37. Guthrie, Orpheus and Greek Religion. The cult’s astronomical
associatins have been discussed by Van der Waerden, Science
Awakening II.
38. Ovid, Metamorphoses.
39. Dall’Olmo, ‘Latin terminology relating to aurorae, comets,
meteors and novae’.
40. The current orthodoxy is that Anatolian, Babylonian and Iranian
influences were the principal ones affecting the very earliest Greek
theogonies: see for example Walcot, Hesiod and the Near East and
West, Early Greek Philosophy. It is not intended to suggest any
Egyptian influence, for example through Orphism, beyond that
which has been established through textual analysis, but merely to
emphasize the detailed features that the respective cosmogonies have
in common. See also James, The Ancient Gods.
41. Neugebauer indicates that there is no evidence for any serious
Egyptian influence on Greek mathematical atronomy. See his ‘The
history of ancient astronomy’. However the Egyptians were skilled in
practical geometry, as evidenced in previous generations by their
construction of pyramids and temples, and possessed a reasonably
matter-or-fact natural philosophy, as evidenced by Plato’s testimony
(chapter 5). Thus the apparent lack of influence is not necessarily an
adverse comment on Egyptian scientific thought and practice since it
is now known that the Greeks forced planetary astronomy into a false
geometrical mould of deferents and epicycles.
42. This quotation is taken from a hymn to the sun-god Aton,
possibly written for the pharaoh (Akhenaton) himself. See Pritchard,
The Ancient Near East.
43. This summary closely follows James, The Ancient Gods.
44. The account here is based on Plato, Timaeus and Critias,
translated by H. D. P. Lee (Penguin Classics, Revised Edition, 1971)
copyright © H. D. P. Lee, 1966, 1971. That there should come to us
on the authority of one of the greatest philosophers of all time the
knowledge that a vast island continent was once lost in a massive
catastrophe has never ceased to amaze: but that there should be,
after centuries of study, still no idea at all when or where the great
event took place certainly puts the mystery in a class of its own. The
suggestion that Plato’s Atlantis is celestial has to our knowledge been
made only once before in modern times, by Prof. H. A. T. Reiche of
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology: see note 98. However the
idea was not unknown in classical times, being mentioned in the
writings of the third-century author Amelius. Reiche suggested that
‘the traumatic folk memory of [a] seismic catastrophe of 1200 BC
may well have coloured Plato’s description of Atlantis’s
end — without the latter catastrophe being reducible to the former’,
whilst also linking the seismic event with the great eruption of Thera
on the Mediterranean island of Santorini. However as we shall see,
the same basic tale of catastrophe recurs from Scandinavia to China,
far from the influence of this eruption. Separate celestial events in
1626 and 1150 BC (note 30), observed worldwide, are now more
probable.
45. This sentence is the first known admission of physical ‘action at a
distance’ without an apparent intermediary. The reference here to
the role of shepherds is unlikely to be entirely casual and may well
hint at an ancient Babylonian source for the knowledge (chapter I),
whilst also offering a clue as to why there is so much confusion over
the date (cf. Folliot, Atlantis Revisited). In the Book of Genesis, it
may be recalled, the lengths of the patriarchs lives are measured in
hundreds of years. Similarly, in the ancient Babylonian records
found on clay tablets in Mesopotamia, it is said that 23 kings had
reigned in the Land of Two Rivers after the Flood and that the total
of their reigns exceeded 24,000 years. These are clearly not realistic
human life spans but they are characteristic of the visible survival
time of short-period comets, and many of the problems of
interpretation that arise in seeking to comprehend these early
genealogies are considerably reduced if we recognize their
fundamentally celestial origin. In like fashion Athens' prehistoric
kings were probably celestial deities, Cerops and Erechtheus being
depicted by the Athenians themselves as partly or entirely
serpentine.
46. Described in Plato, Timaeus and Critias, p. 49. The notion of
fiery rings is also to be found in the works of Anaximander (cf. West,
Early Greek Philosophy). In general, however, modern
commentators have been in great difficulty trying to turn these bands
in the sky into imaginary lines, e. g. see Dicks, Early Greek
Astronomy and Health, Aristarchus of Samos.
47. How cosmological theory evolved over the period 700 BC to AD
300 is too large a subject to describe in any detail in this book — our
aim is merely to highlight certain issues whose significance is
commonly overloocked. See also Bailey et al., The origins of Comets.
For a somewhat broader perspective, see Butterfield, The Origins of
History; Cornford, Principium Sapientiae; Cronin, The View from
Planet Earth; Davidson, The Stars and the Mind; Farrington, Greek
Science; and King, The Background of Astronomy. The general
historical background is well covered in, for example, Boardman et
al., The Oxford History of the Classical World.
48. Aristotle, Meteorologica. See also Jaki, The Milky Way.
49. See Cornford, Sapientiae.
50. See chapter I and Neugebauer, ‘The history of ancient
astronomy’. Neugebauer appears to have been the first to realize this
was a revolutionary rather than an evolutionary development.
Paradoxically, the discovery seems to have had the unintended effect
in post-war years of casting the pre-Socratic natural philosophers in
a non-scientific mould, at least so far as many scientists are
concerned.
51. A much debated issue now but the tendency during the later
classical period to ‘save appearances’ rather than establish truth is
well recognized: e.g. see Farrington, Greek Science. Newton, The
Crime of Claudius Ptolemy casts blame at a particular individual
when it could perhaps be more widely applied. See also Hetherington
and Ronan, ‘Ptolemy’s Almagest’.
52. Whiteside, ‘Before the Principia’. Newton apparently began his
investigation of planetry motions very much in the general spirit of
Descartes' vortex theory, replacing the familiar crystalline spheres
driving the planets with a transparent fluid which, in its subsequent
nineteenth-century manifestation, became the conceptual basis of
the physical aether. In the event, the properties of this fluid proved
something of a mystery and Newton was forced against the spirit of
eartesian thought to describe planetary orbits in terms of an ‘actionat-a-distance’ gravitational law. Indeed the success of this law was an
embarrassment on several accounts for, on applying it to comets, the
latter’s catastrophic potential was evident, causing Newton to
become a secret catastrophist: hence Keynes’s dictum, often thought
somewhat surprising, that Newton was the last of the Babylonian
astrologers (Keynes, Newton, the Man).
53. See Farrington, Greek Scence; also Smart, The Religious
Experience of Mankind.
54. Bailey et al., The Origin of Comets; Cornford, Principium
Sapientiae.
55. Smart, The Religious Experience of Mankind.
56. In our discussion of the Exodus story in The Cosmic Serpent, we
associated these cosmic forces with the progenitor of the Taurid
meteor stream and Comet Encke. That the pillar of fire was a comet
has been suggested from time to time at least as far back as the
Middle Ages, and we were able to demonstrate that the appearance
and behavior of the pillar of fire are indeed those expected during a
close encounter with a great comet. More recent research has
however raised the possibility that Comet Halley was the culprit.
Securely established records of Halley’s comet go back only as far as
235 BC, although it must have been one of the most spectacular
phenomena of antiquity during its 76-yearly returns. As it happens.
Comet Halley had a remarkably close encounter with the Earth in
September 1404 BC (Yeomans and Kiang, ‘The long-term motion of
Halley’s Comet’). So close was the passage to the Earth that the
gravitational deflection could not be calculated with certainty and it
was not possible therefore to track its orbit further back in time. Very
probably, the Earth passed deep within the tail of the comet, which
must have been a terrifying sight. No closer encounter occurred in
the pre-Christian era. Furthermore, within the uncertainties of the
calculation, 1404 BC is the time of the Biblical Exodus. It is
conceivable therefore that the Exodus story contains the earliest
record of Comet Halley.
57. James, The Ancient Gods.
58. Baigent et al., The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail.
59. Cohn, The Pursuit of the Millennium.
60. Augustine, Concerning the City of God against the Pagans.
61. The precise circumstances relating to the strange collapse of subRoman Britain in the fifth decade of the fifth century AD and the
revival of supposed Arthurian Britain in the century following has
been reviewed by several authors: see Myres, The English
Settlements; Morris, The Age of Arthur; Fisher, The Anglo-Saxon
Age; Salway, Roman Britain and Alcock, Arthur’s Britain.
Translations of original texts are now readily available, for example:
Winterbottom, Gildas, and Morris, Nennius. Further insights
concerning celestial associations of Arthurian history are obtainable
from Geoffrey of Monmouth’s History of the Kings of Britain, and
Tolstoy, The Quest for Merlin. Celestial deities have been recognized
in Arthurian legend since the nineteenth century, e.g. Rhys, Celtic
Heathendom. The suggestion that the ‘ruin of Britain’ was caused by
an exceptionally violent fireball explosion remains to be proved. In
the London Penny Magazine of 1834, there occurs the following
strange report: ‘in the process of draining the Isle of Axholme in
Lincolnshire, evidence has everywhere been found not only of
previous vegetation but that this spot must have been suddenly
overwhelmed by some violent convulsion of nature. Great numbers
of oak, fir and other trees were lying 5 feet underground.’ It was
reported that the tree trunks were all aligned north-west/southeast
and had not been dissevered by the axe but had been burnt asunder
near the ground, the ends still presenting a charred surface,’ The
resemblance to the scenes of devastation at the site of the 1908
Tunguska impact (chapter 11) is striking.
The Isle of Axholme is a low-lying area a few square miles in extent,
east of Doncaster. It is part of the Midland/East Anglia region
already mentioned where the Roman civilization appears to have
been erased. If there was a cosmic disaster in the fifth century AD in
this region, it should now be discoverable by direct archaeological
investigation.
62. Klinkerfues, Gottinger Nachtrichten, tr. by Fisher, Popular
Astronomy. Two sources are quoted: ‘In this year (524 after the birth
of Christ), though, there occurred also much running of the stars
from evening quite to daybreak, so that everybody was frightened,
and we know of no such event beside’; and ‘For twenty days there
appeared a comet, and after some time there occurred a running of
the stars from evening till early [morning], so that people said all the
stars were falling’. The year AD 585 saw this shower recur; it is
recorded againg in 837 (China) and 899 (Egypt), and is thereafter
lost until 1584. As described in chapter 9, Biela’s comet, whose orbit
passed within a few Earth radii of the Earth’s, was discovered in
1826, split in two in 1846, and had vanished by 1865.
63. The point to be made here is that there has long been a
disposition on the part of historians to take no notice of the medieval
concern for gods, comets and catastrophes. Dealing with the events
on the continent in the aftermath of the Arthurian age, Gibbon in
The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, for example, reports the
greatly heightened concern at the appearance of several bright
comets, followed by earthquake and fire, during the reign of
Justinian: ‘the nations, who gazed with astonishment, expected wars
and calamities from their baleful influence; and these expectations
were abundantly fulfilled’. But the absurdity of any connection was
already presumed and Gibbon goes on to say, rather aimlessly, that
‘the astronomers dissembled their ignorance of the nature of these
blazing stars, which they affected to represent as the floating meteors
of the air; and few among them embraced the simple notion of
Seneca and the Chaldeans that they are only planets of a longer
period and more eccentric motion’.
64. Bronsted, The Vikings.
65. Riley-Smith, The First Crusade.
66. The Domesday Book was so named, it seems, because British
subjects were convinced their Norman conquerors were preparing
for world-end. Following the decline of the eleventh-century fireball
flux, there followed two centuries of increasing prosperity and
growth during which the Christian church generally enjoyed the
confidence of the European population (see Southern, Western
Society and the Church). These equable conditions eventually went
into sudden decline in the circumstances rather luridly described by
Morris, Historical Tales.
67. See for example King, The Background of Astronomy, and
Cronin, The View from Planet Earth, for more extended historical
accounts.
68. Heilman, The Comet of 1577.
69. Stecchini, The Newton Affair; see also Clube and Napier,
‘Mankind’s future, an astronomical view’.
70. The 1833 Leonid shower, taking place in the era of newspapers,
yields a more complete picture of the effect of a meteor storm on the
population below: see Sanderson, ‘The night it rained fire’. Over
200,000 meteors fell over a nine-hour period. According to
Sanderson, ‘the most terrifying aspect of the shower was the many
brilliant fireballs’. Some of these were as bright as the full moon, and
many people were wakened by the flashes of light thrown into their
bedrooms. Ten to fifteen smoke trails from the bright fireballs were
often visible at a time. Most of the meteors were faint, fast-moving,
apparently coming in waves, and were too numerous to count: ‘never
did rain fall much thicker than the meteors fell towards the earth’.
There was a widespread belief that ‘the world is now actually coming
to an end, for the stars are falling’.
71. With Victorian confidence in Newtonian physics went the solid
understanding that space is filled with an invisible and frictionless
material substance which mediates in transmitting the forces which
physicists now attribute to the action of ‘fields’. This idea ran into
severe difficulties when laboratory experiments designed to measure
absolute motion through the supposed medium failed to work.
Although Lorentz demonstrated that the null result was
understandable if bodies moving through the medium were suitably
contracted in the direction of motion, Einstein realized that the
implied departures from Newton’s laws could also be understood in
terms of the so-called theory of relativity. By this time, physicists
were so exasperated with their failure to devise a proper working
model of the pervasive medium that they were persuaded to adopt
the Einsteinian rather than the Lorentzian theory. This theory was
fundamentally very different from Newton’s laws were known to
work, and so physicists managed to preserve the impression of an
evolutionary rather than a revolutionary development of twentiethcentury from nineteenth-century physics. It is a moot point whether
the impression is false.
72. Although the existence of giant comets has been recognized by
astronomers for some time, the importance of knowing how they
behave when trapped in very short period orbits near the Earth has
only been properly appreciated within the past few years, specifically
in the authors’ first book The Cosmic Serpent and their paper, ‘The
microstructure of terrestrial catastrophism’. The extraordinary
implications of this discovery, some of which are confronted in this
book, are just beginning to be realized. The precise orbit of the Beta
Taurid swarm is not at present known; however, see Clube and
Asher, ‘The Evolution of Proto-Encke’.
73. Hart, ‘The evolution of the atmosphere of the earth’. Various
feedback effects, especially a systematic change in cloud cover, might
act to modify these figures.
74. At the present time it is widely held that comets are formed on
the fringes of, or just beyond, the planetary system. That comets
might on the contrary be genuinely interstellar in origin has been
proposed by a number of workers, including the authors. Comet
cosmogony raises many complex issues which have been reviewed by
Bailey et al., The Origin of Comets.
75. Rudaux and de Vaucouleurs, Larousse Encyclopedia of
Astronomy; Flamarion and Danjon, The Flammarion Book of
Astronomy.
76. Kronk, Meteor Showers. This book provides an excellent
descriptive survey of observed meteor showers and their properties.
77. This is a group of about a dozen known comets, with orbital
periods 500-1,000 years, in very eccentric though similar orbits
which bring them very close to the surface of the Sun, there could be
a hundred or so comets altogether in the group. Some members of
this group have been very large objects (e.g. the comets of 1843,
1880, 1882 and 1887). The comet of 1882 broke into 4 or 5 distinct
fragments, and the comets appear to arrive bunched in time. It is
very likely that these bodies are the remnants of another giant comet
which has undergone a series of disintegrations. They do not,
however, pass close to Earth. We have, then, observational evidence
of two exceptional comets which were thrown into periodic orbits
from the last disturbance of the comet cloud, namely the progenitor
of the Sun-grazing group and the progenitor of Encke’s Comet and
the Taurid streams. However, there are undoubtedly more, at
present on the fringes of the planetary system, and with the potential
to cause glaciations if thrown into the inner planetary system
(chapter 17).
78. Astapovic and Terenteva, ‘Fireball radiants of the 1st
-
15th centuries’.
79. Russell et al., ‘Interplanetary magnetic field enhancemets’.
80. Stohl, ‘On the distribution of sporadic meteor orbits’.
81. Whippole and Hamid, ‘On the origin of the Taurid meteor
stream’.
82. Kresak, ‘Sources of interplanetary dust’.
83. An account of Leonard Kulik’s investigations is given by Krinov,
Principles of Meteorities.
84. Deacon, ‘The 1908 Tunguska explosion’. An impact energy of 10
megatons is often quoted for this event, based on the extent of the
flattened forest. However, estimates based on this are somewhat
unreliable and we have preferred the barographic calculation, which
is more robust.
85. The Tunguska bolide approached from a roughly southern
direction on a long, shallow trajectory, approaching from sunwards.
Its orbit in space can be reconstructed from sightings of the fireball
along its track, and this led the Czechoslovakian astronomer Kresak,
‘The Tunguska object’, to suggest that the missile was part of the
Taurid meteor complex. This was disputed by Sekanina, ‘The
Tunguska event’, though on grounds which no longer seem to be
valid (note 72), and supported by Levin and Bronshten, ‘The
Tunguska event’.
86. Hartung, ‘Was the formation of a 20-km-diameter impact crater
on the Moon observed on June 18, 1178?’. References to the Latin
source and translation by Richmond Y. Hathorn are given therein.
87. Callame and Mulholland, ‘Lunar crater Giordano Bruno’.
88. The suggestion that the Giordano Bruno crater was due to the
Taurid swarm which the Earth-Moon system encountered in 1975
was first made to a public audience by Dr K. Brecher at a talk given
to the American Astronomical Association in Baltimore, Maryland on
June 1984.
89. Useful general texts reviewing recent developments in the study
of ancient astronomy, with particular emphasis on archeological and
mythological aspects, are to be found in Aveni, World
Archaeoastronomy; Blacker and Loewe, Ancient Cosmologies;
Heggic, Megalithic Science, and Krupp, In Search of Ancient
Astronomies, Echoes of the Ancient Skies and ‘Archaeoastronomy
and the roots of science’.
90. James, The Worship of the Sky God.
91. Apollodorus.
92. Van der Waerden, Science Awakening II.
93. Fuhr, Ein Altorientalisches Symbol.
94. Silk paintings unearthed from Han tomb no. 3 at Mawangtui,
China, 168 BC.
95. See Clube and Napier, The Cosmic Serpent, and Hadingham,
Circles and Standing Stones.
96. Jacobsen, The Treasures of Darkness.
97. Personal communication from the American anthropologist E.C.
Baity. See also Baity, ‘Archaeoastronomy and ethnoastronomy so
far’.
98. Reiche, ‘The language of archaic astronomy’ and references
therein.
99. De Santillana and von Dechend, Hamlet’s Mill.
100. Pliny, Natural History II.
101. Nonnos, Dionisiaca.
102. Huxley, The Way of the Sacred.
103. Mackenzie, Indian Myth and Legend.
104. Whitlock, In Search of Lost Gods. See Frazer, The Golden
Bough, for an interesting account of fire rituals; also Note 97.
105. To the ‘slaughter of livestock before winter’ we should add ‘the
onset of the dry season’ as another local explanation for this
worldwide celebration (Aztec rather than Celtic): see Milbrath, ‘Star
gods and astronomy of the Aztecs’ and Krupp, ‘The binding of the
years". Certainly by the time of the last New Fire ceremony (AD 1507,
near Mexico City) the Taurids were relatively inconspicuous;
however the 260-day calendar had been known to the Mayas for
1,500 years, under the name tzolkin. The calendar therefore had its
roots in, and survived through, periods of intense Taurid fireball
activity.
106. Holmes, The Age of the Earth.
107. For references, see Clube and Napier, ‘Giant comets and the
Galaxy’. An authoritative review of the whole question of terrestrial
periodicities as understood up to about 1980 is given in McCrea,
‘Long time-scale fluctuations’. The recent bout of rediscovery of
terrestrial periodicities amongst Earth scientists begins with Raup
and Sepkoski, ‘Periodicity of extinctions’. See also Sepkoski,
‘Periodicity in extinction’.
108. MacIntyre, ‘Periodicity of carbonatite emplacement’.
109. Seyfert and Sirkin, Earth History and Plate Tectonics.
110. That a 15-million-year geomagnetic cycle exists was proposed by
Mazaud et al. ‘15-myr periodicity’. A demonstration of a strong 30-
million-year cycle is given by Pal and Cree, ‘Geomagnetic reversal
spurts’. The data of Pal and Cree reveal, however, that there is also a
weaker interpulse in between the main spurts, yielding an overall 15-
million-year periodicity. A strong-weak-strong-weak cycle with a 15-
million-year periodicity is understandable in terms of the galactic
theory, but not of course the Berkeley proposals of stray impacts or
Nemesis. See also Negi and Tiwari, ‘Matching long-term
periodicities’.
111. Hoyle and Wickramasinghe, Evolution from Space and
references therein. Hoyle and Wickramasinghe’s panspermia and
related claims have been subjected to severe criticism. See, for
example, Davies, ‘A cosmic rod in pickle’ and references therein.
However to date no crucial objection to the overall hypothesis has
been found and their hypothesis, although circumstantial, appears to
unite a remarkable number of diverse phenomena both in the sky
and on the ground.
112. Alvarez et al., ‘Extraterrestrial cause for the Cretaceous-Tertiary
extinction’.
113. Zoller et al., ‘Iridium enrichment in airborne particles’.
114. Leagy et al., ‘Linking impacts and plant extinctions’ ; also
Collinson, ‘Catastrophic vegetation changes’ and references therein.
115. Wolbach et al., ‘Cretaceous extinctions’.
116. Bohor et al., ‘Mineralogic evidence for an impact event’.
117. Hallam, ‘Quaternary sea-level changes’.
118. The stray impact hypothesis was proposed for example by
Gallant, Bombarded Earth and Urey, ‘Cometary collisions with
geological periods’. Gallant’s pioneering work in this area has been
generally neglected, perhaps because of his amateur status. However,
lacking ‘hard evidence’ in the sky or ground, these and other early
suggestions were inevitably speculative.
Two quite distinct and parallel approaches to the catastrophism issue
have been followed since the late 1970's, one geological, one
astronomical. The revival of the proposal from a geological
perspective was made in 1980 by Alvarez et al., ‘Extraterrestrial
cause’, and based on the discovery of enhanced iridium at the level;
and by Smit and Hertogen, ‘Terrestrial catastrophe’. As described in
the text, these studies have spawned many geological investigations
without, however, the injection of much astronomical realism into
the interpretations. Meanwhile, the authors’ more general proposal
based on new astronomical considerations, which included the
Cretaceous-Tertiary extinctions as a particular case, had been
presented in 1979: Napier and Clube, ‘A theory of terrestrial
catastrophism’.
119. See Clube and Napier, ‘The role of episodic bombardment in
geophysics’, ‘The microstructure of terrestrial catastrophism’ and
‘Giant comets and the Galaxy’ and the references therein. For a
convenient up-to-date summary, see Clube, Catastrophes and
Evolution. A discussion of the effects of superwaves from ocean
impacts is given in Hugget, Cataclysms and Earth History.
120. Corliss et al., ‘The Eocene/Oligocene boundary event in the deep
sea’, and the references given by Van Valen, ‘Catastrophes,
expectations and the evidence’.
121. Jablonski, ‘Background and mass extinctions’.
122. Reported in Science News, 129, 356 (1986).
123. See the authors’ ‘Giant comets and the Galaxy’. Ideas relating to
dust injection into the stratosphere have an interesting history. The
astronomers Hoyle and Wickramasinghe proposed that the dinosaur
extinctions may have been caused by the passage of the Earth into
the dense dust tail of a comet, the blockage of sunlight cutting out
photosynthesis and thus cutting the food chain at its base. In the
following year Clube and Napier pointed out that the large impacts
were common on geological timescales and that the dust injected by
the impact of a 10km bolide would have the same effect. They
therefore proposed this as one of the multifarious effects (along with
blast and ozone depletion) of a bombardment episode which might
lead to mass extinction (see Napier and Clube, ‘A theory of terrestrial
catastrophism’, Clube and Napier, ‘The role of episodic
bombardment in geophysics’, ‘The microstructure of terrestrial
catastrophism’ and ‘Giant comets and the Galaxy’ and the references
therein). Following this paper, the 10-km bolide impact/dust idea
was taken up by Alvarez et al., ‘Extraterrestrial cause’, and has since
been the mainstay of the ‘sudden death’ school of geochemists.
That a glaciation might be induced by dust injected from a meteorite
or comet impact was suggested independently by the authors (see the
above references; also Clube and Napier, The Cosmic Serpent) and
by Hoyle and his colleagues (e.g. Hoyle, Ice). These ideas have
evolved and been extended over the past few years both by Hoyle and
colleagues and by the authors, and it is interesting that the role of
giant comets and a fluctuating zodiacal cloud in producing
glaciations has now been recognized by both groups of astronomers
independently. Indeed it is possible now that the more or less
continuous arrival of giant comet debris into the upper atmosphere,
where it is rapidly reduced to submicron dust, plays a significant if
not dominant role in the determination of climate and weather. See
for example Clube and Asher, ‘The Evolution of Proto-Encke’. At the
time of writing these concepts have still to percolate through to the
geosciences community.
That excess poisons introduced via cosmic dust may play a
significant role in the extinction process has been widely recognized,
arsenic (Hsu, ‘Terrestrial catastrophe’) and nickel (Davenport et al.,
‘Nickel as a toxic agent’), being just early and very recent examples of
elements whose effects have been reviewed.
The role of impacts in reversing the magnetic field of the Earth,
through the mechanism discussed here, was suggested by the
authors in a number of papers from 1982 onwards (e.g. Clube and
Napier, ‘The role of episodic bombardment in geophysics’, ‘The
microstructure of terrestrial catastrophism’ and ‘Giant comets and
the Galaxy’), and has since been taken up by, for example, Muller
and Morris, ‘Geomagnetic reversals’ and Burek and Wanke, ‘Impacts
and glacio-eustasy’. These latter authors, however, failed to take
account of the more prolonged stratospheric dusting which may take
place when a very large comet enters a short-period, Earth-crossing
orbit.
We emphasize that the disintegration of giant comets in the innerplanetary regions, leading to the creation of temporary zodiacal
clouds and the intermittent dusting of the Earth’s stratosphere, are
unavoidable consequences of the observed astronomical
environment, and that their neglect either in papers such as the
above, or more generally in the scientific literature on, say, mass
extinctions, can only lead to a partial or false picture of the basic
mechanisms at work. Much of the current American literature
dealing with catastrophism, both popular and technical, is largely
erroneous because of this environmental misconception leading, as
we have discussed, to a quite false dichotomy between a ‘sudden
death’ school which sees only rare giant impacts, and a ‘gradualist’
school which sees no role in evolution for anything higher than the
rooftops.
124. Whitmire and Jackson, ‘Are periodic mass extinctions driven by
a distant solar companion?’; Davis, Hut and Muller, ‘Extinction of
species’. Amongst the critical responses to the proposal, see Clube
and Napier, ‘The microstructure of terrestrial catastrophism’, also
‘Terrestrial catastrophism: Nemesis or Galaxy?’
125. Abt, ‘The ages and dimensions of trapezium systems’.
126. Raup, ‘Biological extinction in Earth history’; and Hallam,
‘Asteroids and extinction’.
127. Shoemaker, ‘Asteroid and comet bombardment of the Earth’.
128. Frei and Christian, Risks of Unintentional War. It should be
noted that in earlier authoritative discussions of the effects of nuclear
weapons, major phenomena were overlooked; firstly, the
catastrophic consequences of ozone depletion, and later, those of
nuclear winter. Given this record, it would not be at all surprising if
there is another major omission in this important area, namely the
prospect of misreading one or more cosmic impacts. To this we may
add the hazard that now comes with the global distribution of
nuclear power stations, any one of which is vulnerable to cosmic
attack.
129. Pringle and Arkin, SIOP.
130. Steinbruner, ‘Launch under attack’; also quoted in Scence, 230,
156 (1986).
131. The discussion hereinafter is based on data taken from
numerous nuclear war/winter studies. See for example: The Effects
on the Atmosphere of a Major Nuclear Exchange (Anon., 1985),
Long-Term Worldwide Effects of Multiple Nuclear-Weapons
Detonations (Anon., 1975), and Dolan and Glasstone, The effects of
Nuclear Weapons.
132. Dansgaard et al., ‘Climatic record’, ‘The abrupt termination’.
133. Woillard, ‘Grand Pile peat bog’.
134. Clube and Napier, ‘The microstructure of terrestrial
catastrophism’ gives references for this section.
135. The likely effects of a cosmic winter go far beyond those we have
mentioned, and extensive discussion could fill another book. A
popular but authoritative account of the likely effects of the
analogous nuclear winter may be found in Dotto, Planet Earth in
Jeopardy. It is pointed out therein that without modern agriculture
the human population of the Earth would collapse to 1-10 per cent of
its present value.
136. Chronicon Estense, see Ziegler, The Black Death for a review
with references to contemporary sources.
References
Abt, H.A., ‘The ages and dimensions of Trapezium systems’,
Astrophysical Journal, 304, 688 (1989).
Alcock, L., Arthur’s Britain (Penguin, London, 1971).
Allen, R. H., Star Names, their Lore and Meaning (Dover
Publications Inc., New York, 1963).
Alvarez, L. W., Alvarez, W., Asaro, F. and Michel, FI. V.,
‘Extraterrestrial cause for the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction’.
Science, 208, 1095 (1980). Alvarez, W. and Muller, R. A., ‘Evidence
from crater ages for periodic impacts on the Earth’, Nature, 308, 718
(1984).
Apollodorus, tr. J. G. Frazer (Harvard University Press and
Heinmann, 1979), I, 81.
Aristotle, Meteorologica, H. D. P. Lee (Heinemann, London, 1952).
Astapovic, I. S. and Terenteva, A. K., ‘Fireball radiants of the 1st-15th
centuries’, in Physics and Dynamics of Meteors, eds L. Kresak and P.
Millman (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1989), 308.
Augustine, Concerning the City of God against the Pagans, tr. H.
Bettenson (Penguin, London, 1972).
Aveni, A. S. (ed.) World Archaeoastronomy (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1989).
Baigent, M., Leigh, R. and Lincoln, H., The Holy Blood and the Holy
Grail (Jonathan Cape, London, 1982).
Bailey, M. E., Clube, S. V. M. and Napier, W. M., The Origin of
Comets (Pergamon, Oxford, 1989).
Baillie, M. G. L., and Munro, M. A. R., ‘Irish tree rings, Santorini and
volcanic dust veils’. Nature, 332, 334 (1988).
Baity, E. C., ‘Archaeoastronomy and ethnoastronomy so far’, Current
Anthropolgy, 14, 389 (1973).
Baldwin, R. B., ‘Relative and absolute ages of individual craters and
the rate of infalls on the Moon in the post-Imbrium period’, Icarus,
61, 63 (1985).
Bellamy, H. S., Moons, Myths and Man (Faber & Faber, London
1936).
Bernal, J. D., Science in History (Watts & Co, London, 1954).
Biot, E., ‘Catalogue générale des étoiles filantes et des autres
météores observés en Chine’ Mémoire de I’Académie des Sciences de
l’Institut National de France, 10, 129-352 (1807).
Blacker, C. and Loewe, M., Ancient Cosmologies (George Allen &
Unwin, London, 1975). Boardman, J., Griffin, J. and Murray, O., The
Oxford History of the Classical World (Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 1986).
Bohor, B. F., Foord, E. E., Modreski, P. J. and Triplehorn, D. M.,
‘Mineralogic evidence for an impact event at the Cretaceous-Tertiary
boundary’. Science, 224, 867 (1984).
Bradley, R., The Social Foundations of Prehistoric Britain
(Longman, London/New York, 1984).
Bronsted, J., The Vikings (Penguin, London, 1960).
Burek, P. J. and Wanke, FL, ‘Impacts and glacio-eustasy, plate
tectonic episodes, geomagnetic reversals: a concept to facilitate
detection of impact events’, Physics of Earth and Planetary
Interiors, 50, 183 (1988).
Butterfield, H., The Origins of History (Methuen, London, 1981).
Callame, O. and Mulholland, J. D., ‘Lunar crater Giordano Bruno:
AD 1178 impact observations consistent with laser ranging results’.
Science, 199, 875 (1978).
Clube, S. V. M. (editor). Catastrophes and Evolution: Astronomical
Foundations (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1990).
Clube, S. V. M. and Asher, D. J. ‘The Evolution of Proto-Encke: Dust
Bands, Close Encounters and Climatic Modulations’, in Asteroids,
Comets, Meteors III (University of Uppsala Press, 1990).
Clube, S. V. M. and Napier, W. M., The Cosmic Serpent (Faber &
Faber, London, 1982).
Clube, S. V. M. and Napier, W. M., ‘The role of episodic
bombardment in geophysics’, Earth and Planetary Science Letters,
57, 151 (1982).
Clube, S. V. M. and Napier, W. M, ‘The microstructure of terrestrial
catastrophism’. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
211, 953 (1984).
Clube, S. V. M. and Napier, W. M., ‘Terrestrial catastrophism:
Nemesis or Galaxy?’, Nature, 311, 635 and 313, 503 (1985).
Clube, S. V. M. and Napier, W. M., ‘Mankind’s future, an
astronomical view: ice ages, comets and catastrophes’.
Interdisciplinary Science Reviews, 11, 236 (1986).
Clube, S. V. M. and Napier, W. M., ‘Giant comets and the Galaxy:
implications of the terrestrial record’, in The Galaxy and the Solar
System, eds R. Smoluchowski, J. N. Bahcall and M. S. Matthews
(University of Arizona Press, Tucson, 1987).
Cohn, N., The Pursuit of the Millennium (Seeker & Warburg,
London, 1957). Collinson, M. E., ‘Catastrophic vegetation changes’,
Nature, 324,112 (1986).
Corliss, B. H., Aubrey, M. P„ Berggren, W. A., Fenner, J. M„ Keigwin,
L. D. and Keller, G., ‘The Eocene/Oligocene boundary event in the
deep sea’, Science, 226, 806 (1984).
Cornford, F. M„ Principium Sapientiae (Peter Smith, Gloucester,
Mass., 1971). Creer, K. M. and Pal, P. C., ‘ON the frequency of
reversals of the geomagnetic dipole’, in Catastrophes and Evolution:
Astronomical Foundations, ed. Clube, S. V. M. (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1989), 113.
Cronin, V., The View from Planet Earth (Collins, London, 1981).
Dall’Olmo, U., ‘Latin terminology relating to aurorae, comets,
meteors and novae’, Journal of the History of Astronomy, 11, 10
(1980).
Dansgaard, W., Johnsen, S. J., Clausen, FI. B. and Langway, C. C.,
‘Climatic record revealed by the Camp Century ice core’, in The Late
Cenzoic Glacial Ages, ed. K. K. Turekian (Yale University Press,
Newhaven, Conn, 1971), 35.
Dansgaard, W„ White, J. W. C. and Johnsen, S. J., ‘The abrupt
termination of the Younger Dryas climate event’. Nature, 339, 532
(1989).
Darlington, C. D., The Evolution of Man and Society (George Allen &
Unwin, London, 1969).
Davenport, S., Wdowiak, T. J., Jones, W. and Wdowiak, P., ‘Nickel as
a toxic agent in bolide impacts’. Geological Society of America,
special paper. In press (1989).
David, R., Cult of the Sun (Dent, London, 1980).
Davidson, M., The Stars and the Mind (Scientific Book Club,
London, 1947).
Davies, R. E., ‘A cosmic rod in pickle’, Nature, 324, 10 (1986).
Davis, M., Hut, P. and Muller, R. A., ‘Extinction of species by
periodic comet showers’, Nature, 308, 715 (1984).
Deacon, E. L., ‘The 1908 Tunguska explosion’. Weather, 37, 6 (1982).
De Laubenfels, M. W., ‘Dinosaur extinction: one more hypothesis’,
Journal of Paleontology 30, 207 (1956).
Dicks, D. R., Early Greek Astronomy to Aristotle (Thames &
Hudson, London, 1970).
Dolan, S. and Glasstone, P. J., The Effects of Nuclear Weapons, 3rd
edn (US Government Printing Office, Washington DC, 1977).
Dorman, F. H., ‘Some Australian oxygen isotope temperatures and a
theory for a 30-million-year world-temperature cycle’. Journal of
Geology, 76, 297 (1968).
Dotto, L., Planet Earth in Jeopardy (Wiley, Chichester, 1986).
Farrington, B., Greek Science (Penguin, London, 1944).
Fischer, A. G. and Arthur, M. A., ‘Secular variations in the pelagic
realm’, Soc. Econ. Paleont. Mineral, special publication, 25, 19
(1977).
Fischer, D. J. V., The Anglo-Saxon Age (Longman, London, 1973).
Flammarion, G. C. and Danjon, A., eds. The Flammarion Book of
Astronomy (George Allen & Unwin, London, 1968).
Folliot, K. A., Atlantis Revisited (Professional Books, Richmond,
1984).
Forsyth, N., The Old Enemy (Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ, 1987).
Frankfort, H., Kingship and the Gods (University of Chicago Press,
Chicage, 1948).
Frankfort, H. and Frankfort, H. A., ‘Myth and reality’, in The
Intellectual Adventure of Ancient Man, eds H. and H. A. Frankfort
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1946).
Frazer, J. G., The Golden Bough (Macmillian Press, London, 1978).
Frei, D. and Christian, C., Risks of Unintentional Nuclear War
(Croom Helm, Beckenham, Kent, 1983).
Fuhr, I., Ein Altorientalisches Symbol (Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden,
1967), in German.
Gallant, R. I., Bombarded Earth (John Baker, London, 1964).
Gardiner, Sir A., Egypt of the Pharaohs (Oxford Univeristy Press,
Oxford, 1961).
Gibbon, E., The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, abridged by
D. M. Low (Guild Publishing, London, 1987).
Goudie, A., Environmental Change (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1983).
Graves, R., Greek Myths I, II (Penguin, London, 1955).
Grove, J., The Little Ice Age (Methuen, London, 1987).
Guillemin, A., Les Etoiles Filantes (Libraire Hachette, Paris, 1889).
Guthrie, W. K. C. Orpheus and Greek Religion (Methuen, London,
1935).
Hadingham, E., Circles and Standing Stones (Anchor
Press/Doubleday, New York, 1976).
Hallam, A., ‘Asteroids and extinction: no cause for concern’. New
Scientist (8 November 1984), 30.
Hallam, A., ‘Quaternary sea-level changes’. Annual Review of the
Earth and Planetary Sciences, 12, 205 (1984).
Hart, M. H., ‘The evolution of the atmosphere of the Earth’, Icarus,
33, 23 (1978).
Hartung, J. B., ‘Was the formation of a 20-km-diameter impact
crater on the Moon observed on June 18, 1178?’, Meteoristics, 11, 187
(1976).
Health, T. L., Aristarchus of Samos (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1913).
Heggie, D. C., Megalithic Science (Thames & Hudson, London,
1981).
Heilman, C. D., The Comet of 1577: its Place in the History of
Astronomy (Columbia University Press, New York, 1944).
Herodotus, The Histories, tr. A. de Selincourt (Penguin, London,
1954).
Hetherington, N. S. and Ronan, C. A., ‘Ptolemy’s Almagest: fourteen
centuries of neglect’. Journal of the British Astronomical
Association, 94, 256 (1984).
Ho, Ping-Yu, ‘Ancient and medieval observations of comets and
novae in Chinese sources’, Vistas in Astronomy, 5, 127 (1962).
Holmes, A., The Age of the Earth (Benn, London, 1927).
Homer, The Iliad, tr. E. V. Rieu (Penguin, London, 1950).
Hoyle, F., Ice (Dent, London, 1982).
Hoyle, F. and Wickramasinghe, N. C., Evolution from Space (Dent,
London, 1981).
Hsu, K. J., ‘Terrestrial catastrophe caused by cometary impact at the
end of the Cretaceous’, Nature, 285, 201 (1980).
Huggett, R. J., Cataclysms and Earth History: the Development of
Diluvialism (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1990).
Huxley, F., The Way of the Sacred (W. H. Allen, London, 1980).
Jablonski, D., ‘Background and mass extinctions: the alteration of
macroevolutionary regimes’, Science, 231, 129 (1986).
Jacobsen, T., ‘Mesopotamia’, in The Intellectual Adventure of
Ancient Man, eds H. and H. A. Frankfort (University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, 1946).
Jacobsen, T., The Treasures of Darkness (Yale University Press,
Newhaven, Conn., 1978).
Jaki, S. L., The Milky Way (Davud & Charles, Newton Abbot, 1973).
James, E. O., The Ancient Gods (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London,
1962).
James, E. O., The Worship of the Sky God (Athlone Press, London,
1963).
Keynes, G., Newton, the Man, Royal Society Newton Tercentenary
Proceedings, 15-19 July 1946 (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1947), 27-34.
King, H. C., The Background of Astronomy (Watts, London, 1957).
Kitto, H. D. F., The Greeks (Penguin, London, 1951).
Klinkerfues, W., ‘Gottinger Nachtrichten’ (1873) 275; tr. W. J. Fisher
in Popular Astronomy, 39, 573 (1931).
Kresak, L., ‘The Tunguska object: a fragment of Comet Encke?’,
Bulletin of the Astronomical Institute of Czechoslovakia, 29, 129,
(1978).
Kresak, L., ‘Sources of interplanetary dust’, in Solid Particles in the
Solar System, eds. I. Halliday and B. A. McIntosh (Reidel,
Dordrecht, 1980), 211.
Krinov, E. I., Principles of Meteoritics, tr. J. S. Romanikiewicz
(Pergamon, Oxford, 1960).
Kronk, G. W., Meteor Showers (Enslow, Albershot, 1988).
Krupp, E. C., ed.. In Search of Ancient Astronomies (Chatto &
Windus, London, 1979).
Krupp, E. C., ‘The ‘binding of the years’, the Pleiades, and the nadir
sun’, Archaeoastronomy, 5, 10 (1982).
Krupp, E. C., Echoes of the Ancient Skies (Harper & Row, New York,
1983).
Krupp, E. C., ed., ‘Archaeoastronomy and the roots of science’, AAAS
Selected Symposium 71 (Westview Press, Boulder, 1984).
Kuhn, T., The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd edn
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1962).
Lamb, H. H., Climate: Present, Past and Future (Methuen, London,
1977).
Leahy, G. D., Spoon, M. D. and Rtallack, G. J., ‘Linking impacts and
plant extinctions’, Nature, 318 (1985).
Leggett, J. K., McKerrow, W. S., Cocks, L. R. M. and Rickard, R. B.,
‘Periodicity in the Lower Paleozoic marine realm’, Journal of the
Geological Society, 138, 167 (1981).
Levin, B. Y. and Bronshten, V. A., ‘The Tunguska event and the
meteors with terminal flares’, Meteorities, 21, 199 (1986).
Lucretius, De Rerum Nature, tr. R. E. Latham (Penguin, London,
1951).
MeCrea, W. H., ‘Long time-scale fluctuations in the evolution of the
Earth’, Proceedings of the Royal Society, A 275, 1 (1981).
MacIntyre, R. M., ‘Periodicity of carbonatite emplacement’, Nature,
230, 79 (1971).
Mackenzie, D. A., Indian Myth and Legend (Gresham Publishing
Co., London, 1913).
McKie, E., The Megalith Builders (Phaidon, London, 1977).
Mazaud, A., Laj, C., de Seze, L. and Verosub, K. B., ‘15-Myr
periodicity in the frequency of geomagnetic reversals since 100 Myr’,
Nature, 304, 328 (1983).
Mellart, J., ‘Egyptian and Near Eastern Chronology’, Antiquity, 53, 6,
1979.
Milbrath, S., ‘Star gods and astronomy of the Aztecs’, in La
Antropologia Americanista en la Actualidad, eds. Mexicanos
Unidos, 1, 289 (1980).
Monmouth, Geoffrey of, History of the Kings of Britain, tr. I.,
Thorpe (Penguin, London, 1966).
Morris, C., Historical Tales: the Romance of Reality (Lippincott,
1893).
Morris, J., Nennius (Phillimore, Chichester, 1980).
Muller, R. A. and Morris, D. E., ‘Geomagnetic reversals from impacts
on the Earth’, Geophysical Research Settlements (Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1986).
Napier, W. M. and Clube, S. V. M., ‘A theory of terrestrial
catastrophism’, Nature, 282, 455 (1979).
Needham, J., The Grand Titration (George Allen & Unwin, London,
1979).
Negi, J. G. and Tiwari, R. K., ‘Matching long-term periodicities of
geomagnetic reversals and galactic motions of the Solar System’,
Geophysical Research Letters, 10, 713 (1983).
Neugebauer, O., ‘The history of ancient astronomy: problems and
methods’, Journal of Near Eastern Studies, 4, 1 (1945).
New Larousse Encyclopedia of Mythology (Hamlyn, London, 1959).
Newton, R. R., The Crime of Claudius Ptolemy (Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore, (1977).
Nonnos, Dionisiaca, tr. W. H. D. Rouse (Heinemann, London, 1940).
Oates, J., Babylon, revised edn (Thames & Hudson, London, 1986).
Olsson-Steel, D., ‘Asteroid 5025 P-L, Comet 1967 II Rudnicki and the
Taurid Meteoroid Complex’, Observatory, 107, 157 (1987).
Opik, E. J., ‘On the catastrophic effects of collisions with celestial
bodies’, Irish Astronomy Journal, 5, 34 (1958).
Ovid, Metamorphoses, tr. and ed. F. J. Miller, 2nd edn (Heinemann,
London, 1984).
Pal, P. C. and Cree, K. M., ‘Geomagnetic reversal spurts and episodes
of extraterrestrial catastrophism’. Nature, 320, 148 (1986).
Plato, Timaeus and Critias, tr. H. D. P. Lee (Penguin, London, 1965).
Pliny, Natural History II, tr. H. Rackham (Heinemann, London,
1968).
Plutarch, Concerning Isis and Osiris, tr. B. Perrin (Heinemann,
London, 1982).
Pringle, P. and Arkin, W., SIOP (Sphere, London, 1983).
Pritchard, J. B., The Ancient Near East. An Anthology of Texts and
Pictures, I, II (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1958).
Ptolemy, The Almagest, tr. G. J. Toomer (Duckworth, London,
1984).
Ptolemy, The Tetrabiblos, tr. F. E. Robbins (Heinemann, London,
1980).
Rampino, M. R. and Stothers, R. B., ‘Geological rhythms and
cometary impacts’, Science, 226, 1427 (1984).
Raup, D. M., ‘Biological extinction in Earth history’. Science, 231,
1528 (1986).
Raup, D. M. and Sepkoski, J. J., ‘Periodicity of extinctions in the
geologic past’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the USA, 81, 801 (1984).
Reiche, H. A. T., ‘The language of archaic astronomy: a clue to the
Atlantis myth?’, Technology Review (December 1977), 85.
Renfrew, C., Before Civilization (Penguin, London, 1970).
Rhys, J., Celtic Heathendom (London, 1888).
Riley-Smith, J., The First Crusade and the idea of Crusading
(Athlone Press, London, 1986).
Rudaux, I., and de Vaucouleurs, G., Larousse Encyclopedia of
Astronomy (Batchworth, London, 1959).
Rundle-Clark, R. T., Myth and Symbol in Ancient Egypt (Thames &
Hudson, London, 1959).
Russell, C. T., Aroian, R., Arghavani, M. and Nock, K.,
‘Interplanetary magnetic field enhancements and their association
with the asteroid 2201 Oljato’, Scence, 226, 43 (1984).
Salway, P., Roman Britain (Clarendon Press, Oxford 1981).
Sandars, N. K., The Sea Peoples (Thames & Hudson, London, 1985).
Santillana, G. de and Dechend, H. von, Hamlet’s Mill (Gambit Press,
Boston 1969).
Sanderson, R., ‘The night it rained fire’, Griffith Observer
(November 1984), 2.
Savage, A., The Anglo-Saxon Chronicles (Macmillan, London, 1982).
Schafer, E. H., Pacing the Void (University of California Press,
California, 1977).
Sekanina, Z., ‘The Tunguska event: no cometary signature in
evidence’, Astronomical Journal, 88, 1382 (1983).
Seneca, Naturales Quaestiones, tr. E. H. Corcoran (Heinemann,
London, 1972).
Sepkoski, J. J., ‘Periodicity in extinction and the problem of
catastrophism in the history of life’, Journal of the Geological
Society, 146, 7 (1989).
Seyfert, C. K. and Sirkin, L. A., Earth History and Plate Tectonics
(Harper & Row, New York, 1979).
Shackleton, N. J., ‘Climate and extinctions in the deep-sea sediment
record’, in Evolution and Extinction, Discussion Meeting of the Royal
Society, 9-10 November 1988. In press.
Shoemaker, E. M., ‘Asteroid and comet bombardment of the Earth’,
Annual Review of the Earth and Planetary Sciences, II, 461 (1983).
Simmons, I. G. and Tooley, M. J., The Environment of British
Prehistory (Duckworth, London, 1981).
Smart, N., The Religious Experience of Mankind (Fontana, London,
1971).
Smit, J. and Hertogen, J., ‘Terrestrial catastrophe caused by
cometary impact at the end of Cretaceous’, Nature, 285, 201 (1980).
Snyder, G. S., Maps of the Heavens (Andre Deutsch, London, 1984).
Southern, R. W., Western Society and the Church in the Middle Ages
(Penguin, London, 1970).
Stecchini, L. C., ‘The Newton affair’, Kronos, 9, 34; 9, 52; 10, 62
(1984).
Steinbruner, J., ‘Launch under attack’, Scientific American, 250, 23
(1984).
Steiner, J. and Grillmair, E., ‘Possible galactic causes for periodic and
episodic glaciations’, Geological Society of America Bulletin, 84,
1003 (1973).
Stohl. J., ‘On the distribution of sporadic meteor orbits’, in Asteroids,
Comets, Meteors, I, eds C. I. Lagerkvist and H. Rickman (Uppsala
University, Sweden, 1983) 565.
Sybilline Oracles, in the Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics II, eds
M. Hastings and E. Selbie (T & T Clark, Edinburgh, 1908-26).
Thomas, K., Religion and the Decline of Magic (Weidenfeld &
Nicolson, London, 1971).
Thompson, L. G. and Mosley-Thompson, E., ‘Microparticle
concentration variations linked with climatic change: evidence from
polar ice cores’, Science, 212, 812 (1981).
Tian-shan, Z., ‘Ancient Chinese observations of meteor showers’,
Chinese Astronomy I (1977), 197, entry no. 39.
Tolstoy. N., The Quest for Merlin (Hamish Hamilton, London, 1985).
Urey, H. C., ‘Cometary collisions with geological periods’, Nature,
242, 32 (1973).
Van der Waerden, B. L., Science Awakening II: the Birth of
Astronomy (Noordhof International Publishers, Leiden, 1974).
Van Valen, L. M., ‘Catastrophes, expectations and the evidence’,
Palaeontology, 10, 121 (1984).
Velikovsky, I., Worlds in Collision (Victor Gollanez, London 1950).
Velikovsky, I., Mankind in Amnesia (Sidgwick & Jackson, London,
1982).
Virgil, The Aeneid, tr. H. R. Fairclough (Heinemann, London, 1978).
Waddell, W. G., Manetho (Heinemann, London, 1978).
Walcot, P., Hesiod and the Near East (University of Wales Press,
Cardiff, 1966).
West, M. L., Early Greek Philosophy and the Orient (Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1971).
Whipple, F. L., The Mystery of the Comets (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1985).
Whipple, F. L. and Hamid, S. E., ‘On the origin of the Taurid meteor
streams’, Helwan Observatory Bulletin, 41, 224 (1952).
Whiteside, D. T., ‘Before the Principia: the maturing of Newton’s
thoughts on dynamical astronomy, 1664-1684’, Journal for the
History of Astronomy, 1, 5 (1970).
Whitlock, R., In Search of Lost Gods (Phaidon, London, 1979).
Whitmire, D. P. and Jackson, A. A., ‘Are periodic mass extinctions
driven by a distant solar companion?’, Nature, 308, 713 (1984).
Wilson, J. A., ‘Egypt’, in The Intellectual Adventure of Ancient Man,
eds H. and H. A. Frankfort (University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
1946).
Winterbottom, M., Gildas (Phillimore, Chichester, 1978).
Woillard, G., ‘Grande Pile peat bog: a continuous pollen record for
the last 140,000 years’, Quaternary Research, 9, 1 (1978).
Wolbach, W. S., Lewis, R. S. and Anders, E., ‘Cretaceous extinctions:
evidence for wildfires and search for meteoritic material ‘, Science,
230, 167 (1985); 234, 261 (1985).
Wood, M., In Search of the Trojan War (BBC Publications, London,
1985).
Yeomans, D. K. and Kiang, T., ‘The long-term motion of Halley’s
Comet’, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 197,
633 (1981).
Ziegler, P., The Black Death (Penguin, London, 1982).
Zoller, W. H., Parrington, J. R. and Phelan Kotra, J. M., ‘Iridium
enrichment in airborne particles from Kilauea volcano: January
1983’, Science, 222, 1118 (1983).
Index
Note: numbers in italics refer to tables and illustrations
adaptation, biological, 217-19
Adityad, 193
Aetius, 106, 108
Aion, 57, 58
Akhenaton, 57, 60, 64
Alalakh, 51
Alexander the Great, 92-3
Alexandria, 93, 94, 99, 100
Almagest, 95
Alpha Draconis, 181
Amasis, 55-6
Amen-Khnum, 189
Amino acids, as extra-terrestrial markers, 225
Amirante basin, 119-20
Ammizaduga, Venus Tablets of, 203
Amon-Re, 64, 66 Amphipitheous, 237
Anatolia, 50 Anaxagoras, 80-1
Anaximander of Miletos, 77
Andromedid meteor shower, 140
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, 110 quoted, 19
Anglo-Saxons, 107, 108, 109
Animism, idea of a Supreme Being, 169
Annales Cambriae, 108
Anu, 66. 171, 173, 174
Anu-Addad temple, Assur, 175
Aphrodite, 176
Apollodorus, 170
Aquinas, St Thomas, 114
Aratus, 181-2
Aries
constellation, 58, 90, 197
ram, 109
Aristotle, 84, 86-9, 90, 91, 92
Aristrarchus of Samos, 79
Aristotelian cosmology, 87, 99-100
and Alexandrian school, 94-6
Artur, M. A„ 211
Aryans, 193
Assur, 175
Assyria, 203
Astapovic, I. S., 149
asteroids, 125-6, 140, 148
in thirteenth to fifteenth centuries, 114-15
bombardment episodes, 212, 225
and plate tectonics, 229-30
and volcanic activity, 229-30
Apollo, 148-9, 165
fragmentation of, 258
swarms, 125-6, 141-2, 144, 226, 255-9
astrolabes, 203
Athens, 69, 71
and war of 371 -362 BC, 91-2
Atlantis, 71, 282 n.
Atlas (Poseidon), 65
Atum, 61, 64, 177
Augustine, St, 106
Australopthecus, 240
Axholme, Isle of (Lincolnshire, Britain), 109
Aztecs, calendar of the, 201
Babylonia, 21, 24, 25-9, 31, 190
administration of legislation in, 75 -6
algebraic techniques used in, 26
astrolabes used in, 203
astronomer-priests in, 27-9
deities, 27, 65-6, 172, 173, 174, 190, 193, 203
planetary names used in, 84, 171
Barringer crater, 246
Bayeux tapestry, 111
Beta Taurids, 141, 147
Bible
Book of Exodus, 194-5, 283-4 n.
Book of Genesis, 61
Book of Revelations, 194-5
possible comet/impact elements in 194-5
Black Death, 19-20, 274boundary stones. 172, 173
Brahe, Tycho, 116
Britain, 43
After collapse of Roman rule, 106-9
British empire, 121-2
Bruno, Giordano, 116
crater, 160-2
calendars, 42, 65, 200-1
Callame, O., 161
carbonatite, cycles in production of, 210-12
Carchemish, 51
catastrophism
‘Biblical’, 123, 125
Terrestrial, 33, 122, 142, 219-36
Celts, 43, 109
calendar of the, 200
mythology, 191
China, Ancient Astrologers in, 31
Comet symbols used in, 175
Myths, 190-1
Observations of meteor showers in, 19, 91, 100
China, Feast of the Dead, 200
Chiron, 147, 259-60
Christian, C., 253
Christianity, 103-4, 110, 112, 126
and the apocalyptic tradition, 105-8
chronology, in pre-Christian era, 279-80 n.
Chronos, 170, 186
Cicero, 79
civilization, 242
beginnings of (map), 22
early, and climate, 34-5
climate, 145
Cohn, N., quoted, 106
Comet Biela, 110, 120, 138, 139
Comet of 1680, 116-19
Comet cloud, 133
recent disturbance of, 145
comets, 132-3
as source of biologically active material, 218
becoming asteroids, 140-1
composition of, 133
cycles of activity, 143-4
fragmentation of, 67, 138-40
giant, 136-7, 141, 144, 145, 219 256-7
orbit of, 133
outgassing from, 140
short-period, 148
showers, 136, 137, 145
size of, 136-7
sources of disturbance to orbits of 133-4, 136
stratospheric, 226, 228, 229, 231, 259, 267, 272
symbols used for, 172-80
see also Comet Biela; Comet of 1680; comet cloud; Encke’s
Comet; Halley’s Comet; Lexell’s Comet; Great Comet of 1843;
continental drift, 207-8, 229-30
cooling of Earth see global cooling
Copernicus, 7, 116
cosmic swarms, 126-7, 139-42, 144, 226, 255-9
Council of Clermont, 112
craters see impact craters creation myths, 40
Crete, 46, 47, 48
Critias, 71-2
quoted, 90
Cronos, 57, 58, 65, 66
Crusades, 110, 112
cylinder seals, 174
Cypro-Minoans, 47
Dansgaard, W., 265
Daressy, George, 189
Dark Age, 54, 82, 89,106 ff.
Darwin, Charles, 122
de Lanbenfels, M. W., 223
Deccan traps, 225, 230-1
deterioration in fifth century AD, 108
and early civilization, 34-5
see also global cooling
Dechend, H. von, 182-4, 190
Democritus of Abdera, 79, 171
Deucalion, flood of, 118, 183
dinosaurs, 13
extinction of the , 222-4, 226-7, 228
Diodorus Siculus, 138
Domesday Book, 285 n.
Donnelly, Ignatius, 122, 124
Dorman, F. EL, 208 dust caused by impact, 261-2, 267
Dyaus-Pitar, 193
Dionysian Monastery (Mount Athos),
Fresco, 30
Ea, 27, 172, 173, 174
Earth
comet cloud and disturbances of, 145-6
effect of possible asteroid impact on, 219-22
impact craters on, 212, 213, 245-6
magnetic field of the, 213-15, 216 231-2
Orbit of, 132, 166, 267-8
Earth sciences, 33
Eclipses, 184
Egypt, Ancient
chronology of civilization in, 45
climate, 34
collapse of Middle Kingdom, 39-40
cosmology, 38-9, 60-4; and morality, 74-5
Deities, 37-40, 177, 178, 179, 191
In ‘interregnum period’, 52
mythology, 37-44, 56, 60-4, 66-8, 74-5, 177, 191; Ancient Greek
mythology and, 56
and Orphism, 57, 60
temple construction, 38
Einstein, A., 285
Emmeduranki of Sippur, 23
Encke, Johann, 147-8
Encke’s Comet, 80, 147-8, 149, 164
Loss of mass from, 152
Orbit of, 151, 152-3, 166, 190, 192
Enlil, 27, 172, 173. 174, 203
Ennead, 61
Enuma Anu Enil, 23
Ephorus, 138
Epicycles, Ancient Greek theory of, 26-7
Equinoxes, precession of the, 182-3, 196-7
Eridanus, 182
Essenes, 102-3
Eudoxus, 71, 84
Euhemerus, 56
Eurystheus, 54
evolution, 216-18
Exodus, Book of, 194-5, 283-4n
extinction cycles, 209-10, 210, 212, 214. 222-9
marine, 221-2, 227-9
Fireballs, 97, 100, 110, 147, 164, 165, 185, 255
activity during Babylonian period and Chinese T’ang dynasty,
98
daytime swarms, 142
impact on radio communications, 249-50
see also meteor showers; Tunguska impact
fire-bull rituals, 180
fire festivals, 42
fischer, A. G., 211
Flamsteed, John, 119
fossil pollen, 265-6
fossil record, 221, 228
Frei, Daniel, 248, 253
Fuhr, Use, 171, 177
galactic periodicities, 143-5, 219
galactic tide. 134, 136, 143, 215-16, 218
Galaxy, the, 131
Galico, 116
Gargantua, 191
Gauss, Johann, 147-8
Geminid meteor stream, 147
Genesis, Book of, 61
Germanus, bishop of Auxerre, 107, 108, 109
Gervase of Canterbury, 159
Gibbon, Edward, 109 165, 268
Greece, Ancient, 70-6
Alexandrian cosmology in, 94-5
Aristotelian cosmology in, 84, 86-9
and Babylonian astronomy, 26
change in form of government in, 76
changes in view of the gods, 56, 84, 86-9
cosmology related to that of Ancient Egypt, 64-8
mythology of, 54-6, 64-8, 170, 186, 188-9, 191-2
planetary names used in, 84
pre-Socratic cosmology in, 77-83
religion and government in, 94
rise of natural philosophy in, 74-5, 77-8
Greeks, Ancient, racial origins of, 45-6
Greenland, analysis of dust particles in Polar ice, 269, 270, 272
Grilimair, E., 211
Grove, 35
Gildas, 106-9
global cooling, 226, 228, 231, 238, 239-40, 263-8, 274-5
Golden, Age, 183
Golenetskii, S. P., 270
Gould’s Belt, 144, 145, 256
Grande Pile (Vosges, France), 266
gravitational force, exerted by galactic structures, 134, 136
Great Comet of 1843, 137
Hallam, A., 235
Halley’s Comet, 111, 118-19. 140-1, 283-4 n.
Hamid, S. E„ 151
Hammurabi, 75
Hartung, J. B., 159-60
Hathor, 62, 177, 178
Hattusas, 50
Hawaii, volcanic activity, 239, 240
Hephaistos asteroid, 149, 219-20
Heracles, 54, 55, 56-7, 58, 66-7, 191
‘Heracles knot’, 177
Heraclids, 51, 52, 54, 66-7, 67-8, 70
Herodotus, 55-6, 71
Herschel, Caroline, 148
Herschel, William, 120, 218
Hesiod, 191-2, 193
Theogony, 186, 187. 188
Hipparchus, 182
Hittite empire, collapse of, 50
Holmes. Arthur, 208
Holy Roman Empire,
Homer, 57, 59
Quoted, 17
Hominids, 239,42
Horoscopic astrology, 26, 43, 96-6
v. omen astrology, 95, 100
Horns, 38, 39, 66, 74
Hoyle, F„ 218, 289 n.
Huxley, F., 191
Hyades, 190-2
hydrogen, molecular. 133-4
ice ages, 146, 211, 241-2, 263-8
ice caps, 226, 236, 239
Cosmic dust particles in, 268-72
Icelandic myth, 263
impact craters
lunar, 159-62, 234, 247
terrestrial, 212, 213, 227, 245-6
impact rates, 245-8
calculated for urban areas, 254-5
Indian mythology, 192, 193
Indo-European tribes, 169, 170
Indra, 193, 196
Indus Valley, 34
Innana, 177, 180, 203
Ionia, 74
iridium deposition, 223, 224-5, 226-7, 228-9, 269-70
iron meteorites, 245 -6
Ishtar, 176 Isis, 39, 62
Jablonski, D., 229
James, E. O., 170
Judaic cosmology, 101-3
Jupiter, 137, 148
Kepler, Johann, 116
Kilauea, 22
Kiab al-Mughni, 83
classification of planets by, 85
Klinkerfues, W., 110
Knossos, 46
Kowal, C. T„ 259
Kreutz group, 140
Krinov, E. L., 186
Kulik, Leonard, 157, 244-5
La Violette, P., 269-70
Leonid meteor shower, 285
Levant, 50
Lexell’s Comet, 120
Lindisfame, 110
Lorentz, H. A., 285
Lucretius, 82 quoted, 17-18
Lydus, 188
Lyell, Sir Charles 123
Macedonians, 92-4, 99
MacIntyre, R. M., 210-12
Manson crater, 227
Marduk, 27-8, 65-6, 190, 193, 203
marine life, 220-1
extinction cycles, 221-2
matter, replication of, 217-18
Mechain, 148
megaron, 49-50, 51
Mephis, 60, 61
Meschenet, 177
Mesopotamia, 20-1, 23, 24, 34
chronology of civilization in, 45
ethics and religion in, 75-6
status of kings in, 76
Messier 83
galaxy, 135
meteorites, iron, 246
meteor showers, 19, 91, 100, 138, 139, 140, 141-2, 285
meteor streams see Taurid meteors stream
Milankovitch, M., 267
Miletus, 50
Milky Way, 81, 131
Minoans, 46
collapse of civilization of, 47-9
script, 47
spiral motif on pottery of, 177, 178
molecular clouds, 133-4, 143-4
monotheism
Moon
asteroid impacts on the, 153
cratering of the, 159-62, 234, 247
Giordano Bruno impact, 160
laser ranging of, 160-1
meteoroids striking in 1972-6, 141
Morris, C., Historical Tales: The Romance Of Reality quoted, 19-20
Mulholland, J. D., 161
Myceneans, 45
collapse of civilization of, 46-50, 73-4
palace construction, 49, 50
myth
Ancient Chinese, 190-1
Ancient Egyptian, 37-45, 56, 60-4, 66-8, 74-5, 177, 191
Ancient Greek, 54-60, 64-8, 170, 186 188-9, 191-2
Babylonian, 27, 65-6, 172, 173, 174, 190, 193, 203
Celtic, 191
Indian, 192, 193
possible comet/impact elements in, 194-5
sky gods in, 40-1, 169-70
navigation, by ancient peoples, 181
Neanderthal man, 241
nebulae, 133-4, 143-4
Nemesis hypothesis, 232-6, 244
Nennius, 108
Neugebauer, Otto, 25-6
Newton, Isaac, 96, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 126, 283 n.
Nicetus of Syracuse, 79
Nicolas of Cusa, 114-15
Nile, and Ancient Egyptian cosmology 61-2, 189
Nonnos, 192, 193
Dionysiaka, 188-9
nuclear war, risk of accidental, 248-54
Nurnberg Chronicle, Aristotelian planetary system represented in,
87
Nut, 61, 62, 63, 177
Oceanus, 182
Ogyges, flood of, 118
Oljato, 149, 152-3, 258
omega sysmbol, 172, 173, 174, 177, 178
omen astrology, v. horoscopic astrology, 26, 95, 100
development of, 67, 169-72
Orion nebula, 144
Orphism, 57, 66
Osiris, 38, 39, 41, 61
temple of (Abydos), 176, 179
Ovid, quoted, 59
oxygen isotope record, 265
pole star, 183
pollen, fossil, 265-6
Polynesians, 181
polytheism, 169
Pons, 147
Poseidon, 59, 65
precession
of equinoxes, 182-3
of orbits, 184, 190, 197
primates, evolution of, 237-42
Ptah, 60, 61, 64, 65, 66, 191
Ptolemy, Claudius, 95, 144
Ptolemy Soter, 94
Pyramid Text Pythagoras, 29, 57
Pythagorean cosmology, 78
Palestine, 50
Panorama Stone, Illkley, 176
Paul of Tarsus, 103
Peking Man, 241
Phaethon, 18, 57-60, 70, 73
Phanes, 58
Philip II of Macedonia, 92
Pioneer space probe, 149
planets
naming of, in ancient world, 83, 84, 171
orbital periods of, 132
plate tectonics, 105-6
and impact cycles, 229-30
Plato, 57, 61, 72, 84, 91, 99
quoted, 70-1
Pliny, 29, 32, 188
comets described by, 83
Plutarch, 188
quoted, 41
poisons, introduced by cosmic dust, 289 n.
Qadesh, 50
Qatna, 50
Quartz particles, shocked, 227, 231
Quetzalcoatl, 201, 202
Radlof, J. G., 123-5
Ramasses, tomb of (Thebes), 177
Rameses III, 53
Raup, D. M„ 213, 223, 235
Reiche, H. A. T., 282 n.
Revelations, Book of, 194-5
Rhea, 170
Sais, 70
Samos, 91-2
Samson, 190
Santillana, G. de, 182, 190
Saturn, 65
Saxons see Anglo-Saxons
Scandinavia, 242
Schafer, E. H„ 31
Scorpio, 144 sea floor, 207-8
sea level, 226, 228, 231
cycles, 208, 209, 211
Seleucus, 79-80
Seneca, 79
Quoted, 18-19
Sepkoski, J. J., 213
Serapis, cult of, 100
Seth, 38, 39, 40, 41, 61, 74
Seyfert, C. K„ 212, 230
Shoemaker, E. M., 247
Sifrin, L. A., 230
Silver Age, 183
SIOP, 248, 252
Sirkin, I. A„ 212
sky gods, in ancient mythology, 40-1, 169-70
sociological theories of civilization, 36-7
Socrates, 72
Solon, 69-73, 76
solstices, 200
Sothic calendar, 47
spiral arms, 215-16
spiral symbol, 177, 178
Steinbruner, J., 251, 252
Steiner, J., 211
Stohl, J„ 151
Stohl stream, 151-2
Strab, 191
Strata, 94-5
Sumeria, 21, 23
Sun companion star hypothesis, 232-4
current position in Galaxy, 256
and molecular clouds, 134, 136, 143-4
orbits of the, 143, 210, 215-16
swarms, cosmic, 126-7, 139-42, 144, 226, 255-9
swastika symbol, 175-80
Sybilline Oracles, quoted, 18
symbols, for comets, 172-80
Tarasque, 191
Tarsus, 50
Taurid meteors
mythological connection, 187-8, 195
stream, 98, 145-52, 156, 160-3, 165
Taurus, constellation of, 145, 195
technological evolution, theories of, 36
tektites, 228
temperature cycles, 208-9, 210
Terenteva, A. K., 149
terrestrial catastrophism, 33, 122, 142, 219-36
terrestrial cycles, and bombardment episodes, 212
Tetrabiblos, 95
Thales, 77-8
Thebes, 64
Thera, volcanic eruption on, 47
Thessaly, 170
Timaeus, 72-3
time cycles, in myth, 182
timescales, astronomical and human, 167, 168
Tiryns, 49, 51
Troy, 50, 70
Tunguska impact, 155-8
Analysis of debris from, 270, 273
Tutankhamun, 64
Tycho crater, 161
Typhoeus, 189
Typhon, 41, 188, 191, 192, 194-5, 196
Ugarit, 50
ultraviolet light, 218
Urban II, Pope, 112
urban impact, 254-5
Urey, H. C., 221
Varuna, 193
Vedic texts, 193
Velikii Usting, 186, 187
Velikovsky, Immanuel, 123, 125, 154
Venus, 201, 203
Victorian period. 121-2
Vikings, 110-12
Virgil, quoted, 17
volcanic activity, 237 -9
cycles in, 211-12
and impact cycles, 230
Vortigem, 107, 108, 109
Whipple, F. L., 151
Whiston, William, 119
Whitlock, R„ 200
Wickramasinghe, N. C., 218
Woillard, G., 266
world ages, 182, 183
world history, patterns in 42-3
Zarathustra, 29
Zervan, 58
Zeus, 59, 65-6, 170, 186, 188, 189, 191, 192-5
Ziusundra, 23
zodiac, 58, 67
zodiacal cloud, 79, 81
zodiacal light, 80, 81, 152, 167
Zoroastrianism, 102
