<p>The animals, birds, and reptiles became overpopulated
and held a conference to determine what to do. The
kangaroo, eagle-hawk, and goanna were the chiefs of the
three respective groups, and their advisors were koala,
crow, and tiger-snake. They met on Blue Mountain.
Tiger-snake spoke first and proposed that the animals and
birds, who could travel more readily, should relocate to
another country. Kangaroo rose to introduce platypus, whose
family far outnumbered any others, but the meeting was then
adjourned for the day. On the second day, while the
conference proceeded with crow taunting koala for his
inability to find a solution, the frilled lizards decided
to act on their own. They possessed the knowledge of
rain-making, and they spread the word to all of their
family to perform the rain ceremony during the week before
the new moon. Thus would they destroy the over-numerous
platypus family. They did their ceremonies repeatedly, and
a great storm came, flooding the land. The frilled lizards
had made shelters on mountains, and some animals managed to
make their way there, but nearly all life was destroyed in
the great flood. When the flood ended and the sun shone
again, the kangaroo called animals together to discover how
the platypus family had fared. But they could not find a
single living platypus. Three years later, the cormorant
told emu that he had seen a platypus beak impression along
a river, but never saw a platypus. Because of the flood,
the platypuses had decided that the animals, birds, and
reptiles were their enemies and only moved about at night.
The animals organized a search party, and carpet-snake
eventually found a platypus home and reported its location
back to the others. Kangaroo summoned all the tribes
together, even the insect tribe. Fringed lizard was ejected
for doing mischief; he has turned ugly because of the hate
he dwells upon. The animals and birds found they were both
related to the platypus family; even the reptiles found
some relationship; and everyone agreed that the platypuses
were an old race. Carpet-snake went to the platypus home
and invited them to the assembly. They came and were met
with great respect. Kangaroo offered platypus his choice of
the daughter of any of them. Platypus learned that emu had
changed its totem so that the platypus and emu families
could marry. This made platypus decide it didn't want to be
part of any of their families. Emu got angry, and kangaroo
suggested the platypuses leave silently that night, which
they did. They met bandicoot along the way, who invited the
platypuses to live with them. The platypuses married the
bandicoot daughters and lived happily. Water-rats got
jealous and fought them but were defeated. Platypuses have
tried to be seperate from the animal and bird tribes ever
since, but not entirely successfully. [<a href="#WRSmith">W. R. Smith</a>, pp. 151-168]</p>