MAGNETIC CURRENT 


By ED LEEDSKALNIN, ROCK GATE 1945 


1 


MAGNETIC CURRENT 

By EDWARD LEEDSKALNIN 
ROCK GATS 


Halstead. rloxL&a, 0- s. A. 
Copyright October. 1545. by Edward Leedskalnlu 


This writing is lined up so when you read it you look East, and all the 
description you will read about magnetic current, it will be just as good for 
your electricity. 


Following is the result of my two years experiment with magnets at Rock Gate, 
seventeen miles Southwest from Miami, Florida. Between Twenty-fifth and Tventy- 
sixch latitude and Eightieth and Eighty-first Longitude West. 





2 


MMNvnc ccjucdtt »>• tzvAfto •.EPEtsiOiUllS. XX* 5*nt DM 


First I will describe what a magnet is. 

You have seen straight bar magnets, U shape magnets, sphere or ball magnets 
and Alnico magnets in many shapes, and usually a hole in the middle. 

In all magnets one end of the metal is North Pole and the other South Pole, 

and those which have no end, one side is North Pole and the other South Pole. 

fi—> »rg° 


© 4 * 

Now about the sphere magnet . if you have a STRONG MAGNET you can change the 
poles in the sphere in any side you want or take the poles out so the sphere 
will not be a magnet any more. 



O 


In Summary 

Prom this you can see that the magnet can be shifted end concentrated and 
also you can see that the metal is not the real magnet. The real magnet is 
the substance that is circulating in the metal. 



Each particle in the substance is an individual magnet by itself. 

And both North and South Pole individual magnets. They are so small that they 
can pass through anything.. In fact they can pass through metal easier than 
through the air. 






moncrxc cvmdr Oy ixkaxo LBOttKALKm. bock oats 19*5 


3 


Thay are in conotant motion. Thay are running one kind of magnets against the 
other kind, and if guided in the right channels they possess perpetual power. 



The North and South Pole magnets,they are cosmic force, thay hold together this 
earth and everything on it. 



Each North and South Pole magnet is equal in strength, but the strength of each 
individual magnet doesn't amount to anything. To be of practical use they will 
have to be in great numbers. 


• 0 


in permanent magnets they are circulating in the metal in great numbero, and they 
circulate in the following way: Each kind of the magnets are coining out of their 
own end of the pole and are running around, and are running in the other end of 
the pole and back to its own end, and then over and over again. All tho 
individual magnets do not run around. Some run away and never come back, but new 
ones take their place. 






c 



Nuntic cnnyr iiy ismasij i^.ecska^kui, #oc" cat* HJ' 


3.1 


Tho earth itself is a great big magnet. 



• « 


H 

Tn general these North and South Pole individual mxynets are circulating in 
the same way as in the permanent magnet metal. The North Pole individual 
magnets are coming out o£ Che earth's South Pole and are running around in 
the earth'* North Pole and back to its own pole, and South Pole indxvidua* 
magnets are coming out of the earths North Pole and are running around, and 
in earth South Pole and back to itG own end. Then both North and South Pole 
individual magnets start to run over and over again. 


N 



In a permanent magnet bar between the polea there is a aemi-neutral part 
whoro there is not much going in or out, but on the earth there is no place 
where the magnets are not going in or out, but the magnets are running in and 
out at pole ends more than at the Eguator. 



1 / 


/ 





Now you get the equipment and I will tell you, 
you can see for yourself that it is in the way 

have told. 


so 

I 


in a permanent ^ ^rth’ 

in and out ^ 

* ^gVnTral ^S? "ole ^ a TerTTh ” a“* £££, 

1„ rough estimation the 

^XsTafS^affliS Polo magnets .to run in Northeast and Southwest 

direction. 


Magnetic Current by Edwura 


Loed.Valnin, Florid*. U3A - 1,45 



4 


*IC COWUMT Hy EOiAXD l^liOSKA-KIll. 


BOCK CATS ms 


NOW you g*t the equipment and I will tell you, so you can see for yourself 
that it is in the way I have told. 


Get a permanent magnet bar four inches lonig 

A U shape magnet that is strong enough to lift from ten to twenty pounds. 
An Alnico magnet about three inches long, two and one-half inches wide, 
one-inch thick. Hole in the middle and poles in each end 
Several feet in length of hard steel fishing line. Line when it is not in 


coll it stays straight and 
a soft steel welding rod one-eighth of 


an inch thick and three feet long. 


From tha fishing wire and the welding rod you will make magnets or compasses, 

and if you hang then up in fine threads by middle and keep them there they 
will be permanent magnets. 

When you are making a magnet pole in the welding rod use U shape r^net . 
South Pole magnet to make North Pole magnet in tne rod and use U shape Kor-h 
Pole magnet to make South Pole magnet in the rod. You can drag the magnet 
over the rod from end to end, but never stop in miadle. 



If you stop in middle there will be an extra pole so it wiil <disturb the 
magnet’s circulation. Use iron filings to test the rod it «»•*« 18 
magnets in the middle, and if there is the filings «iJ 1 cling to it. Tnen 
drag the permanent magnet over the rod and it will take it out. 

To take the magnet out from rod ends approach or touch the rod end with the 
tame kindof ^magnet that is in the rod. by dipping the rod ends in iron 
filings, you will see how it works. 

. B-eak three oieces of the steel fishing line just long enough to go in 
between the two poles of U shape permanent magnet. 

• Put them endwise between the two poles, and take them out. 

• Hang one by middle with fine thread, and hang it up in Easv side of the 
room where there is no other magnet or metal around. 

Now you will have a permanent magnet or compass to test the polarity in other 

raagnots . For more delicate use hang tne magnet in spider web. 


To test the strength of a magnet use iron filings, 





wowrrxc cvhxjwt »y swwtD trrontAiam. bock oats ms 


5 


• Put the U shape permanent magnet two feet Wost from the hanging magnet. 

• Hold the North Pole magnet in 'level with the hanging magnet, then you will 
see that the South pole of the hanging magnet is turning to you and the 
North Pole magnet away from you. 

• Now put the South Pole permanent magnet pole in the same level, this time 
North Pole magnet will turn to you and South Pole magnet away from you. 

This experiment shows two things, one that the magnets can be sent out in 
straight streams, and the other whatever kind of magnets you are sending out 
the other kind of magnets are coming back to you. 



• Take two pieces of steel fishing line wire, put them in U shape magnet, 
hold a little while, take them out, bend a little back in one end and hang 
them up, 

• Make it so that one magnet's lower end is North Pole magnet and the other 
South Pole magnet 

• Make it so that they hang three inches apart. 

• Put North Pole North side, and South Pole South side. 

• Now take the four-inch long permanent magnet bar, hold North Pole in North 
side and South Pole in South side. 

• Raise slowly up to the two hanging magnets, then you will see that the 
hanging magnets are closing up. 

• Now reverse, put North Pole of bar magnet South side and South Pole North 
side. This time when bar magnet approaches the hanging magnets will spread 
out. % 

This experiment shows that North and South Pole magnets are equal in strength 

and that the streams of individual magnets are running one kind of magnets 

against the other kind. 







tBKaxnC CVWUNT tty ma» LCSDCXMjgiM. *CCK QftVS »*«S 


6 


Cut a strip of a tin can about two inches wide and a foot long. 

Put the North Pole of the U shape magnet on top of the strip, and dip the 
lower end in iron filings, and see how much it lifts. 

Now put the South Pole on top and see how much it lifts. 

Change several times, then you will see that the North Pole lifts more than 
the South Pole 


n 


n 




I 


U U 




• Now put the North Pole magnet under the iron filing box, and see how much 
it pushes up. 

• Now change, put South Pole Dragnet under the box and see how much it pushes 
up. 

• Do this several times, then you will see that the South Pole magnet pushes 
up more than North Pole magnet. 


This experiment shows again that on l«wel ground the magnets are in equal 
strength. Q * 

r 

—- 

i 

• Now take the three-foot long soft steel welding rod. It is already 
magnetized as a permanent magnet, hang it in a fine thread so it is in 
level. 

• Now measure each and you will see that the South end is longer. 

In ny location at Rock Gate, between Twenty-fifth and Twenty-sixth Latitude 
and Eightieth and Eighty-first Longitude West, in three-foot long magnet the 
South Pole end is about a sixteenth of an inch longer. Farther North it 
should be longer yet, but at Equator both ends of the magnet should bo equal 
in length. In earth’s South hemisphere the North Pole end of magnet should be 
longer. 











MMMSTIC CUWOOff By R3KMIO l*MtiSKALKIM. SWC* OT* 194 S 


7 


All my hanging magnets or compasses they never point to the earth’s magnetic 
pole, neither to Che geographical pole. They point a little Northeast. The only 
reason I can figure out why they point in that way is. looking from the same 
geographical meridian the North magnetic pole is on. the South magnetic pole is 
one hundred and fifteen longitudes West from it. In rough estimation the earth’s 
South magnetic pole is two hundred and sixty miles West from the same meridian 
the earth's North magnetic pole is on. That causes the North and South Pole 
magnets to run in Northeast and Southwest direction 

location is too far away from the magnetic poles so all ray magnets are guided 
the general stream of individual North and South Pole magnets that are passing 




Current / 


What is magnetic current? 


Magnetic / 2.having to do with a nagnet or jragnetism. 

2.passing from one to another. 7.something chat flows, as a stream 


Tho Macquarl* Coecieo dictionary, third edition. 



CUMJWT By SMM» LKEOSXX-N1K. ROC* Qfcte 1>45 


8 


Now I will tell you what magnetic current is. 

current i. the .am. .. .l~tric turret. Current i. . wrong 
expression. 


Really it is not one current, they are two currents, one current 
of North pole individual magnets in concentrated streams and the other is 
composed of South Pole individual magnets in concentrat^ streamy and 
are running one stream against the other stream in whirling, scte.1. 
fashion, and with high speed. 


One current alone if it he Korth Pole magnet current or South Pole magnet 
current it cannot run alone. 


To run one current will have to run against the other 




DIRECT*** 





Making Magnetic Current 
with 

batteries from metal by acid* 



How the currents run when they exit a car battery 
and what they can do. 


You will see the principle of how permanent, magnets are made by North 
and South pole individual magnet currents running in a single wire 

from a battery. 

This magnet-making with a single wire, it illustrates how all magnets 

are made. 

Each pole South or North is made by thier own magnets in the way they 

are running in the wire. 


Kagnatic Current by tdword leadskalnin. Kaa.»C.ad, Florida, USA. 19*5 



Kuarnc cv».**Jf* ay E»a*D WXK GMT 1945 


9 


New I will tail you how tha currants ara running when thay coma out of a car 
battery, and what thay can do. 

Now get the equipment. 

• First out a wooden box on floor, open side up, cut two notches in middle so 
you can put a one-eigth of an inch thick and eighteen-inch long copper wire 

across the box. 

• Put the wire one end Bast, the other West. , . 

. Stay yourself West, put car battery South side of the box positive terminal 

Bast, n4»gative terminal West, 

• get two flexible leads and four clips to fit the battery and the bare 

. connect*the'East end of the copper wire with positive terminai, clip the 
West end of the copper wire with the West side flexible -ead, 

. leave the connection with negative terminal open. 


O 

t 


Break two pieces of the steel fishing line one inch long, 
put each piece by middle across the copper wire, one on top 
wire and the other under, 
hold with your fingers, 

now touch the negative terminal with the loose clip, 
hold until the copper wire gets hot. 

Take them off. now you have two magnets, 
hang them up by middle in fine thread. 


of the copper 


The upper magnet will hang the way it is now, but the one below will turn 
around. 



Break five inches long piece of the fishing line, 
put the middle of the wire across and on top of the 
touch the battery. 

hold until the copper wire gets hot. 

dip the middle of the wire in iron filings, 


copper wire, 


then you will see how long a magnet can be made with this equipment. 







M uaaETIC CVMUBJT By 8CKM0 IKWMUUH. POCK CAT* 1*41 


10 


E 

N v S 
W 


Break or cut several pieces of the hard steel fishing wire as long as to go 
between the poles of the U shape magnet. 

now hold two pieces of the steel wire ends up and down one wire South side of 
the copper wire, and the other North side, the lower ends just below the 
copper wire. 

Hold tight and touch the battery, 
hold until the copper wire gets hot. 




• now hang them up by upper end just above the copper wire, 

. touch battery, the South side magnet will swing South, and the North s-de 
magnet will swing North. 


V-,."© 

f \\ 


/ ^ 


:o 


Put two pieces on top of the copper wire, the ends just a little over the 

Thos^ends^lying on copper wire, one pointing South and the other North. 

hold tight, 
touch battery. 

hold until the copper wire gets hot. 

cake off the one pointing South is South Pole magnet and the one pointing 
North is North pole magnet. 




North. 


• Magnetize, 

• hang up by tail ends on the copper wire, 

• touch battery they both will swing South. 

• Put one wire on top of the copper wire pointing North, 

• Put the other below pointing South. 


• magnetize, 

• hang up by tail end above the copper wire, 

• touch the battery, both magnets will swing North. 




MAOCKTIC CBWOWT By EWM3 ICTOSKALMXH, BOCK CAT* ms 


11 


Cut six pieces of fishing wire one inch long, 
put them by middle on top and across the copper wire. 
Hold tight, 
touch battery, 

hold until copper wire gets hot. 

Take off. 


'■"v 


V. 


^ 


-0 


=□ 


O' 


now put glass over the copper wire. 

put those six pieces of magnets on glass, on top of the copper wire 
lengthwise just so the ends don’t touch each other. 


V..,- 


s 

o 


touch the battery, they all will turn across the copper wire. 


* ✓ 

• now pull three to South side and three to North aide in the same way, they 
lie now but about one-half of an inch away from the copper wire, 

• touch battery, they all will jump on the copper wire. 


:o: 




• NOW roll all six together, let loose, 
won’t stay together. 


and you will see that they 




12 


nc cuwumt »y iiwaso lkeoskauhw. 


ROCK CATS tft) 


• Magnetize one piece in 0 shape magnet, 

• put North Pole end East on the copper wire, 

• put South Pole West, 

• touch the battery, the magnet will swing left. 

• Now put South Pole E&ot side 

• Put North Pole West side, this time the magnet will turn right. 



0 B ^ 

o ’<3° o ’o 0 


• take glass off. 

• Take one piece of hard steel fishing wire, 

• dip in iron filings and see there is no magnet in it. 

• This time hold the wire up. and down, the lower end on middle of the copper 
wire. 

• hold tight. 

• Touch Che battery, 

• hold until the copper wire gets hot. 

• Take it off. 

• Dip the wire in iron filings ... and you will sec that it is no magnet. 





0 ) Why? 


To make magnets with currents from batteries and dynamos with a single wire the 
natal will have to be put on the wire in such a way so that the magnets which ere 
coming out of the wire will be running in the metal starting from the middle of 
the metal and run to the end and not from end to middle and across as they did 
this last time. 


kT 



- - •>•>. 


0 


U' 



■B 


r 


i 


You have read that to make a South Pole in a coil end Chat i* pointing to you, 
you will have to run positive electricity in the coil in clockwise direction, 
can tell you that the positive electricity has nothing to do with making a South 
magnet pole in the coil. Each pole south or North is made by their own magnet, in 
the way they are running in the wire. This magnet-making with a single wire, it 
illustrates how all magnets are made. 






IOU3MVT3C cuansrr IIY HMMD UttOSXAMIlV. *OCX GW* 19*' 


13 


In a car battery the North Pole magnets run out of positive terminal and South 
Polo magnet* run out o£ negative terminal. Both kind* of magnet* are runnxng, one 
kind of magnet* against the other kind, and are running in the same right-hand 
screv fashion. By using the same whirling motion and running one kind of magnets 
against the other kind, they throw their own magnet* from the wire in opposite 
directions. That is why if you put a magnet metal across the copper ware the one 
end is North Pole and the other end South Pole. 



• bend one end of each wire back so the clips can hold it better. 


• use copper wire first. 

• Put both wir©3 in clips, 

• connect with battery, have the wire ends square, 

• now put the loose ends together, and pull them away 


then you wiJl notice that something is holding you back. 


Q ) what is it? They are magnets 


When you put the ends together, the North and South Pole magnets are passing from 
one wire £ the other, and in doing it they pull the wire ends together. 




UofeA /*>" 



You will see the 


space left where the magnets 
were in. 


When you put the ends together, the north and south pole magnets are 
wnen you passing from one wire to the other. 

bubble is cooi, breaic it up. 


Mgnatio Currant by M"* 1 ^ 


LaadaXalain, Hceontaad. Florid*. OS*. 1945 



MM2MBTXC CUMUTf ETaCAME PO*'X CATV 11(5 


14 


Now put the soft iron wire in the clips, 
put the loose ends together, and 

pull then away, this time the passing magnets hold the wire ends together 


stronger. 

Put the ends together many times then you 'will see which wire end gets red 
first, and which will make the bigger bubble in the end, . . . and watch the 
little sparks coning out from the bubbles. 

Stretch the bubbles out while they are in liquid form, 


then you will see in the bubble that something is whirling around. 

Those little sparks you see coming out of the bubble, they are not the magnets, 
but the magnets are the ones which throw the sparks out of tne bubbles. 

Khan ail Che magnets that arc in the wire, if they cannot pass over to the other, 
wi-e they are cxoendir.g the bubble and running out of it and carrying the metal 
sparks with them. When the bubble is cool, break it up, then you will eoe the 
apace left where the magnets were in. 




1 



Batteries are not balanced. 


Sometimes there is more of North pole magnets than there South 

pole magnets. 

They should be equal. 

This includes generators which do not run the South pole magnets in 

frame or base. 


Magnetic Curran* by Edward Laadnkalain. Hcaectaad. riorida. US*. 1#43 



Kwaotric CmuuaR By BXUtO !.**»* KALI. IN. ROCK OATt i»tS 


15 


• Get two pieces of lumber, one by 3ix inches, a foot long, 

• nail them together so that or.o lies flat on floor and the other on top the 
edges up and down, 

• Out a notch in end in upper piece, four inches deep and as high as to hold a 
piece of wood or brass that would hold needle points in ends and have a hole 



• Balance the magnet good so it would stop on its right magnetic position. 

• Now put the car battery South side positive terminal East and negative 
terminal West. 

• Connect the East end of the copper wire with positive terminal 

• and connect the West end of the copper wire with the West side lead, 

• hold the copper wire just above the magnet a quarter of an inch North of 
magnet’s end, 

• hold in level and square. 

• Touch the battery, then you will see the magnet swinging East. 


w 


o 





• Now put the’ battery North side, positive terminal East, negative terminal 
West, 

• connect West end of the copper wire with negative terminal, 

• connect East end of copper wire with Ea3t side lead. 

• put the copper wire on top of the magnet a quarter of an inch South of 
magnet's end, 

• hold the copper wire just above in square and level, 

• touch the positive terminal, then you will see the magnet swinging West. 

If the battery is right, magnet strong enough, and the magnet rod balanced good 
it will repeat the same thing every time. 

I think the batteries are not made right. Sometimes there is more of North Pole 
magnets than there is South Pole magnets. They should be equal. The same as from 
generators which do not run the South Pole magnets in frame or base, but run 
directly away the same as they run the North Pole magnets. 



Ktoerrsc cwowrr By sokajiu UXOSKAUCDT. KOCX cat* I9<9 


16 


From the following experiment you will see that the battery is not balanced 
right. 

• Put the copper wire across the box, one end East, the other end West, 

• connect one lead a foot West from East end 

• and the other lead with west end, 

• hang a magnet ir. spider web, 

• put the magnet ir. same level with the copper wire. 

• Keep the copper wire end a little away from magnet's North Pole 

• connect East lead with positive terminal, 

• tap the negative terminal several times with the loose clip, and see what the 
magnet is doing. 

• Change the terminal, 

• change the topping, 

• move the box and copper wire to the South Pole end, repeat - the same thing. 

Then you will notice sometimes the copper wire end pushes away the North Pole 
magnet, and sometimes it pulls it in and the same thing happens with South Pole 
magnet, and sometimes it does nothing. 

So it shows the battery is irregular. 



mkcmttzc cowan n By K 2 «l*t> IXHXMCXI*. MCK oytt 19«$ 


17 


• Connect the leads with battery's terminals to make a loop, 

• keep the leads on the sane level with battery, 

. drag a hanging magnet over the loop and the connections between the 
battery's terminals. 


You will see that one end of the magnet keeps inside the loop, and the other 
outside, and the same thing happens when the magnet crosses the connection 
between the terminals. 


This experiment indicates that the North and South Pole magnet currents were 
not only running from one terminal to the other, but are running around in an 
orbit and are not only running one time around, but are running many times 
wound until the Worth and South Pole individual magnets get thrown out of the 
wire by centrifugal force, and by crowding. 

While the North and South Pole magnets were in their own terminals they or.iy 
possessed pushing power, the pulling power they acquire only if the other 
kind of magnets are in front of them, luce the permanent magnets if you 
the opposite magnet in front, of it, then they will hold together Thesameway 
you have done with the six inches long pieces of copper and soft iron wire. 




« 


From the experiment with the car battery you can see the principle how 
permanent magnets are made by North and South Pole individual magnet currents 
running in a single wire from battery. 


Q ) How did the magnets get in there? . - ■ Ac 1 said in the |~gi*ning. the 
North and South Pole magnets they are the cosmic force, they hold together 
this earth and everything on it. 



W * »*kLJ 






NkStOCTZC CUW«*V? By PfMMtfl OKHDSXW.BXK, ROCK HATS 


18 


Some metals and non-metals hove more of the magnets than others. The North 
and South Pole magnets have the power to build up and take down, for instance 
in welding the magnets take the Welding rod down and put it on the welding, 
in electroplating they put one metal on the other, and if you burn a metal 
too much in an electric furnace the metal will disappear in air. 


The North and South Pole magnets were put in the car battery by a generator. 

When the North and South Pole magnets went in the battery they built up a 
charge that held the magnets themselves. 

Later on the acid takes the matter in parts and separates the magnets and 
sends their, to their own terminals, and from there they come out. 

In other batteries the acid takes the zinc in parts and sends the North Pole 
magnets to positive terminal and holds the South Pole magnets by -.tsel. for 
negative terminal. 

When the connections are made the magnets will come out of the battery and 
will come out until the zinc will last. When the zinc is gone the magnets arc 
gone, too. 

The same is true if you put iron in acid and some other metals, for the other 
terminal and when the connections are made the magnet® will come out of the 
battery, but when the iron is gone the magnets are gone, too. 

This should bo sufficient to see that the North and South Pole magnets are 
holding together everything. 



You saw how magnetic currents are made in battery from metal by acid. 

Next I will tell you how magnetic currents are made by permanent and electric 
magnets, and then without either. 



Making Magnetic Current 
with 

permanent and electric magnets# and without 

either. 



CUMUUf; By «*AK> UKWWtN, tOCT. OATS *-«S 


19 


-Vi. tinuJ vou will Bike an equipment that can he used for four purpose*. 
Electric magnet, transformer, generator and holder of perpetual motion. 


serd iron or soft steel bar one and one half inch in diameter, bend in a U 

shape 1 each°prong a foot long, and three inches between the prongs. 

ma*rtwo spools iron brass or aluminum six inches long and big enough for 

Wi^hfifteeThundred turns of insulated copper wire, size sixteen, on each 

spool. . 

Put on as close to the bend as it wiu go. 

the other South Pole. Now you have an electric magnet. 


^—v-flllHl- 

©--^> 1111111 — 


-vi. f ima the same thing will be a transformer. 

S^rnot be economical, it is only to she™ how a transformer works. 

. Wind a coil of fifteen hundred turns with insulated copper wire, sise 
eighteen? ona spool less than three inches ion,, so that one inch and a 

. gec^cwo^rods^one* three? S/iSTita inches Ion,. If Possible have then, 

. Get^two^radio^blue"bead, six to eight-volt light bulb*. 

. MOW connect one light bulb with the three-inch coil, 

. put the coil without a core between the loose ends of the iron prongs, 

• connect che six-inch coils with battery, 

: C^n 4 4attvr«mtLrthen you will see the wire inside the light bulb 
turn red. 




• Put iron core ir. the coil’s hole, 

• tap the battery, this time it will make light. 


iiiuv 


•v-MlWM ~Kf| H~~ c O ' 


xtgtpssa 

Now you see the soft iron ha. a lot to do to make magnetic currents. 

" cJTt iron has a lot to do with making magnetic current 



KWJOTTIC CURBMCr By KCMAStt) ROCK OAT* 1915 


20 


Magnetic currents, or if you want to call it electric current, make no light. We 
only get light if we put obstructions in the light bulbs. 

In the light bulbs the wire is so small that all magnets cannot pass through 
easily, so they heat the wire up and burn and make light. 

If the wire in the light bulb had been as large inside as it is outside Chen 
there would be no light. Then those individual magnets which are in the coil 
would dissipate in air. 

Both North and South Pole individual magnet currents which came out of the car 
battery and went in the transformer were direct currents, but the light in the 
bulb was caused by alternating currents. 


{Have in siind that always Chore are two currents, one current alone cannot run. To run they tiave to run 

one against the other.) 



\ 1 / 







AU. CVXS&HTS Ai-TF*N*T* 

A P/PP - ALT6*NAr>N$ Pot6 
- 0 \t*ECT poiS 



t>P / AP 



mem tic crwmw? »y cwxjto icttKKAMnil. ROCK <»tk 1J45 


TOU transformed currents in kind. Now I will tell you how to transform 
currents in strength. 


To make highor voltage you wind the coil with smaller wire and more turns and 
to have less voltage wind the coil with bigger wire and less turns. 


•llllll£Z3p; 



The difference now is that this transformer makes alternating currents from 
direct currents and the power line transformers use alternating currents to 
make alternating currents. 


• -> 

9 

9 -> 

O -> 

9 


vr / 

AP 

/ 


9 

9 


In this transformer, the iron prong ends remain the same magnetic polarity 
(magnet poles) , but in power line transformers the polarities (magnet poles) 
alternate. In power line transformers the currents only are in motion and in 
this transformer the currents are in motion and you are. too. 



xmnric cuwuorr By caaso t-EEMXAUiin. koct o?.tk 1*15 


21.1 


Now about the generator. 

In Che first place all currents are alternating. To get direct currents we have 
to use a commutator. 


Transformers and generators of any description are making the currents in the 
same way by filling the coil’s iron core with magnets and letting the iron core 
push them out and into the coil. 



• Connect the battery with the electric magnet, it will be a field magnet now. 

• Put the three-inch coil between the iron prongs. 

• and take it out, 

• do it fast. 

• repeat it 

then you will have a steady light in the light bulb. 



Him c: 


• v 

o 

O' 


Now you and the field magnet are a genarator. 



*OtCK*r:c c tam n By nwn SattSSKAUUEI. see* CAT* 194* 


22 


! Suppose you had a wheel and Many coils around the wheel turning, then you 
would, be making all kinds of light. Do not make the machine, I already have the 
application for patent in the Patent Office. I made ten different machines to 

make magnetic currents, but I found this combination between field magnots and 
coils the most efficient. 

• Put the coil in slowly and take it out slowly, then you will have no light. 

That will show, to make magnetic currents, the time is important. 

• Put the six-inch long square rod on top of the two iron prongs, fit good so it 
lies even. 

• Connect the battery with electric magnet for a little while. 

• now disconnect the battery, 

• connect the light bulb with the electric magnet the same way it was connected 
with the battery, 

• now pull off the six-inch long bar, do it quickly, 
then you will see light in the bulb 


0^v_>HIUII- 1 


Hiiifli—| v * /" | 

Miiim— 1 — 1 


• connect the battery up again with the electric magnet, 

• put the bar across the iron prongs, 

• hold awhile, 

• disconnect the battery. 


Mow the electric magnet holds perpetual motion. If not disturbed it will last 
indefinitely. I held it in this position for six months, and when I pulled of. 
the six-inch bar I got just as much light out of it as I got in tne first time. 


This experiment shows that if you start the North and South Pole individual 
magnets in an orbit, then they will never stop. 




3 ft (91.44 cm) 


jJDi 1.5 inch 0 (3.81cm) 



spools 


:• 

« 

i 


i ift 

(30.48 cm) 

. 




QOQC 


i I ( 
f { I 

1 i 


6 Inch (15.24 


5 inch (12.7 cm) 



191 motors 
1500 turns 


■*- cot-off oxcoss 


12.7 k 1.500 
19050™ 


6inch (15.24 cm) 

- - 1 □ 1.5 inch 0 (3.81cm) 


3 Inch (7.62 cm) 

j "j f~| 1.5 inch 0 (3.81cm) 


spool 

□ 3 inch (7.62 cm) 

! 

5 Inch (12.7 cm) 







I Soo 


pcuppiual. motion holder 



/AUU^' NV/M S' 130 © 1 - 



NUXERC COMM! *y OWt WHliHAIJIlN. ROCK QMS IMS 


23 


The hanging magnets that hang up and down, they show that tharo is ®otion inside 
tha bar. 

• Hold the perpetual motion holder North Pole magnet (or pole end East) and 
South Pole magnet terminal (or pole end West), 

• now raise it up slowly to the South Pole hanging magnet, then you will see the 
South Pole hanging magnet swinging South. 

• Now put the perpetual motion holder under the North Pole hanging magnet, 

• raise up slowly, then you will see the North Pole hanging magnet swinging 
North. 


This experiment shows without any doubt that tha North and South Pole individual 
magnets are running in tha same direction aa those in the copper wire, which came 
out of the car battery, and in both instances while the magnets are running ahead 
in whirling motion they used the right-hand twist. 



• Get that Alnico magnet, 

• ar.d make it so you can turn it wound if possible more than two thousand 
revolutions a minute. 

• Connect the light bulb with the perpetual motion holder, 

. put it on the spinning Alnico magnet in the hole between prongs and the square 
iron bar, 

• now spin the Alnico magnet around and see how much of the light you get. 

• Now take the iron bar off 


then you will get more of the light. 


It shows that if it is closed, some of the magnets which were in the iron P ongs 
will run around in an orbit, and will not come out. But when the orbit is broken, 
then they will run in the coil and the result will be more light. 


^>111111—' 1 

/%i‘! !!••■•••?* 


-fc—• 


✓’Hill?— 


Nii.m- 



nONMlC CVWUBf 1 By LOXMMUUN. BOCK G*7* 19<» 


24 


• Put a paper box with plenty of Iron filings in it on the horizontally spinning 
Alnico magnet, then you will see how the spinning magnet builds up ridges and 
ditches. 

• Now put the magnet so that it can be turned vertically. 

• Spin the magnet, then you will see the filings running against the motion and 
building up ridges and ditches. 

• Put on finer filings, then there will be finer ridges and ditches. 

• Spin one way and then the other way, 

then you will have some rough idea how magnets build up the matter. 



You made magnetic currents in three different ways, but in principle they ell 
were made exactly in the same way. 

Magnetic currents are made by concentrating, then dividing and then shifting the 

existing North and South Pole individual magnets from one place to another 


-* , i ' If: $ 

t 



mumrjc cuhuwt ay i irwAno ixecskauuk. rock satu 19«* 


25 


Now I will illustrate how my best machine is doing it. 

1 will use only one coil, and one U shape permanent magnet without using the 
winding that the machine uses to increase the permanent magnet strength. 

• If you had a permanent magnet that the coil you use in the electric magnet 
would go in between the prongs of it, then that would be good to demonstrate, 
but if you have not, then use the same one you have. 

Q ® 

• Get an iron core the same dimensions as in the three-inch coil, but long 
enough to go between the permanent magnet prongs. 

• Wind the same number of turns and 

• connect with the light bulb. 

Hill j®} 

cm inn' 

• Fasten the U shape permanent magnet very good, bend up, prongs down, North 
Pole North. South Pole South. 

• Now push the coil through the prongs from west to East. 

• Do it fast, 

then there will be light in the bulb, 

« 

■■ft; 

e inn 

■. • o 

y ‘ 

• now push the coil and stop in middle, and then push again, . . this time you 
will have two lights while the coil went through the magnet prongs only once. 





You had two lights the first time also, but you did not notice they came in quick 
succession. When you pushed the coil's middle up to field magnet's middle the 
currents ran in one direction, and when you pushed the coil away from the field 
magnet's middle, then the currents reversed, then ran in the other direction. 


That is why you got two light flashes while the coil passed through the fiold 
magnet only one time. 



moincrzc ewm» By hwaho i-km)$km>iiin. SOCK gats 1>«S 


26 


Here is the way in which the North and South Pole individual magnet currents ran 
while you pushed the coil from West to East through the field magnet. 

• Take the core out of the coil, 

• wind one layer of wire on the core and make it so that the North side of the 
winding wire’s end points Bast and South side of the winding wire’s end points 


% 


When you pushed the coil to the middle of the field magnet, the North Pole magnet 
current came out of the wire end that is pointing East, and the South Pole magnet 
current came out of the wife end that is pointing West, but when you pushed the 
coil away from the middle of the field magnet the currents reversed, then North 
Pole magnet current came out of the coil's wire end that is pointing West aiu 
South Pole magnet current came out of the coil's wire end that is pointing East. 

With the same winding if the North Pole field magnet had been southside, and 
South pole field magnet northfeide, then the running of the currents would be 
reversed. 


mil 

(t) 

• © 


When currents reverse they reverse the magnet poles in the coll. Every time when 
the coil is approaching the field magnets, the currents which are made in the 
coil during that time are making magnet poles in the colics core ends, the same 
as those field magnet poles they arc approaching, but during the time the coil js 
receding those currents are making the coil’s magnet pole3 opposite to the field 

magnets they are receding from. • 

>. • A 

\ ’dm KA *• ' cv 




t - Vr ' 


• ^ 


While you have the small coil handy I will tell more about magnets. 0 

• Run South Pole magnet current in the wire end that points West, and 

• North Pole maqnet current in the wire end that points Bast. 

. Now North end of the coil is South Pole and South end of the coil is North 

Pole. . 

• Now run North Pole magnet current in West end of the wire, and 

. South Pole magnet in Beat end of the -ire. This itime tl» North end of the coil 
will be North Pole, and South end of the coil the South Pole. 





laiwnc comara By ctkmio mkoskalkiu. socst <»tx 1»45 


27 


You made the one-inch long magnets with a single wire, but if you had 

• the same size of wire in a coil you now have and would 

• put a bigger steel bar in the coil 

then you would have a bigger and stronger magnet. 


But to make a stronger magnet yet, you would have to 

• wind more layers on top of the coil that you have now. 


When you were making the small magnets with a single copper wire you wasted 
too many North and South Pole individual magnets. You only got in the steel 
wire very small part of the magnets that came out of the copper wire. You 
are still wasting the North and South Pole magnets. You do not get one-haIf 
of the magnets in the steel or iron bar from those which are in the coil. To 
get store magnet out of a coil 

• put the coil in steel or iron tube. 



then the tube outside the coil will be a magnet the same as the coil s core, 
but the magnet poles will be opposite, it means at the same coil end if the 
core end is North Pole the tube end will be South Pole. In this way you will 
get almost again as much magnet out of the coil and in the core and tube. 


You can do better yet. 



• join one end of the coil's core end with the same metal, joining core with 
tube make two holes in end of metal for the coil wire ends to go out, 

• fasten a ring on top, 


now you have the most efficient client electric magnet for lifting purposes. 

It wastes no magnets that come from your battery or dynamo. 





;C ctMSR tty HPUA*g> L£Sn**Al^UN. *OCX OAUS litS 


28 


• Take Che coil out of the electric magnet, 

• run the currents in the coil, 

• put a hard steel bar one end to the coils North 

• hold awhile, 

• cake away. 


now Che bar is a permanent magnet. 


. , . i , j. south Pole magnet, ar.d the other North Pole 

Sss -s “S.“" ssrsr-.sear 


The coil made this permanent magnet in the same way that the permanent 
magnets are making other permanent magneto. 



• Put this permanent magnet in the coil's hole. 

• Reverse it. Put bars North Pole end in coil's South Po.e end, 

• run current in the coil for awhile, 

• take the bar out. 

new you have a stronger permanent magnet, but the pole, are reversed. 

This shows that the stronger magnet can change the weaker magnet. 



* 




0 



Mwaorrtc Cinuuwr *y &VMMID UXSSKA1X1H. ROCK ©ATK 1 *«5 


29 


When you were pushing the coil through the U shaped magnet you got two flashes in 
the light bulb with one passage through the U shape magnet, and I showed you fro* 

which ends of coil's wire the currents caae out while they made the flashes. 



Now I will make so you can actually see that it is in the way I told you. 

• Take the light bulb off the coil, 

• put the core in it, 

• connect the coil with a loop that would reach six feet Bast from the U shape 
magnet. 

• Keep the loop end a foot apart, 

• stretch South side wire straight, make it so it cannot move. 

• Get those little hanging magnets which hang one end up, the other down, 

• hang the South Pole magnet on the loop wire, 

• now push the coil through the U shape magnet and watch the hanging magnet. 
First it will swing South, then North. 



• Now hang North Pole magnet on the wire, watch again while you are pushing the 
coil through the U shape magnet, this time first it will swing North, then 
South, . 



• Hang both magnets. Watch again and you will see that both magnets at the same 
time first they swing to their own side and then to the other side. 

« • • 

£ \ ff 

• ( 3 ° °cT» 

(If the hanging magnets do not swing while you are pushing the coil through the U 
shape magnet, then the U shape magnet is not strong enough. The U shape magnet 
should be strong enough to lift twenty pounds.)You can put two magnets together 
or use electric magnet, and still better you can put the coil in electric magnet, 
then you won’t have to push it. Then you can sit down and tap the battery and see 
the hanging magnets swinging. If you want to use the electric magnet be sure that 
the North Pole is in North side, and the South Pole in South side, and put the 
coil in the prongs in the same way as it is now. 



«xawr:c cuwomt By ««w> ugnfwumi. *oc< sm 1M» 


30 


All currents ere made in the sane way by filling the coil and iron core with 
North and South Pole individual magnets and then giving enough tune for the 
magnets to get out and then start over again. 




MU3MBTIC CWSMITT ®y HXAfD LXKOSKALMiN. AOC* OAT* IMS 


31 


Now I will toll you what happened to the U shape magnet while you pushed the coil 
through it from west to East. 


• Set up the three-foot magnet so it can turn, 

• put the coil with core in it in the U shape magnet, 

• now approach the three-foot magnet’s South Pole with the U shape magnet’s 
South Pole. 

• As soon as the three-foot magnet begins to move you stop and mark the 
distance. 

• Take the coil away, approach again 

• as soon as - the three-foot magnet begins to move away, then stop and mark the 
distance. 


then you will see how much strength the U shape magnet lost while you were 
pushing the coil in and halfway out, of the U shape magnet. 



Tho U shape magnet was losing its strength up to the time it began to break away 
from the iron core, but during the time the U shape magnet broke away it regained 
its strength. The breaking away from Che iron core recliarged the 0 shape magnet, 
then it became normal again and ready for the next start. During the recharging 
the new supply of magnets come from the air or the earth's magnetic field. 


Now we see how the magnetic currents 


are made by the U shape magnet. 






MAGNETIC CTUB fl By KMfM> *QCK GATC l*«5 


32 


You already know that before the 'coil got in between the U shape magnet prongs 
those little individual magnets were running out of the U shape magnet prongs in 
all directions, but as soon as the coils core came in effective distance from 
the U shape magnet's prongs then these little individual magnets began to run in 
the core and coil and kept running until the core broke away from the U shape 
magnet prongs. Wow you see those little individual magnets ran out of the U shape 
magnet ar.d ran in the soft iron core, but the soft iron core never held the 
magnets, it pushed them out. 



To prove it you 

• put five or six thin iron strips on edge, 

• slant just so they will not flop over, 

• now approach to the ends of those strips with a magnet and you will see they 
flop over, 

• hold the strips a little loose by the ends, then they will spread out. 

I think this is enough to show that the soft iron never held those magnets. It 

pushed them out. As soon as those little individual magnets get pushed out of the 
soft iron core then they run in the coil. 


t 

-r o—• 0 —• 

When they run in the coil they are in bulk form. The coil's part is to divids 
those little individual magnets from bulk fora in small paths. 

The coil is not necessary to make magnetic cur-rents. Currents can be made with a 
single wire. The coil is necessary to increase the amount and strength of the 
currents. The coil is similar to any cell battery. One cell alone does not amount 
to anything. To be good, many cells have to be in a battery. The same in a coil 
to be good many turns have to be in a coil. 

* - **■ 1 " r 

. • V-CV i - t= " “ 





£«•• •' t-» 

c < t 



:c CUMMMT By KD**SV. ^fi£05X«4ilW. RCCK OAT* 1J4*. 


33 


Wh*n the magnets that are in bulk form enter the coil then the coil divide* them 
in email paths. It is done in this way; 

When the bulk magnets enter the coil they fill the coil's wire with North and 
South Pole individual magnets. North Pole magnets pointing toward Soutn Pole U 
shape magnet and South Pole pointing toward North Pole U shape magnet. 


Now the wire in tho coil is one continuous magnet. One side of the wire is South 
Pole and the other North Pole. 




Now we have those little North and South Pole individual magnets in the wire, but 
they are not running in the way we want, they are running across the wire. 



We want the magnets to run through the wire lengthwise, but there is only one way 
to do it, we have to increase the number of those North and South Pole individual 
magnets. To do it the coil will have to approach and enter the U shape magnet, 
but when the coil reaches the middle of the U shape magnet the limit is there so 
the running of the currents stop. 



In the core ar.d the coil there is plenty of those little magnets, but they 
stopped to run through the wire length wise, now they run only across the coil s 


wire. 


to make the magnets run in the wire lengthwise again the coil will have to get 
away freen the U shape magnet. As 30on as the coil Dugins to move away from the U 
shape magnet, then these little north and South Pole individual magne.a begin to 
run again through the wire length-wise, out in opposite direction until the 
magnets in the iron core arc gone. 


0 



Kuanic cramnrr By cwwic wawwaW, KOCK GATT 


34 


I told you that the coil is a magnet during the time the currents are made, now 
I will show you. 

• Get a small paper box to go in between the prongs of the U shape magnet, 

• put iron filings in it. 

• Wrap six-inch long soft iron wire with paper. 

• put the wire in box in iron filings, 

• now put the box between the U shape magnet prongs. 

• Raise the wire up, then you will see filing strands clinging to the insulated 
iron wire. 

• Raise the wire up slowly, then the filing strands will sag and fail, 

• take the box out. 

• put the wire in the filings again, 

• raise up and you will see that the wire is no magnet, but during the time it 
was between the U shape magnet prongs it was a magnet. 

This shows that during the time the coil moves through the a shape magnet the 
coil becomes a magnet, but its function is double. Some individual North and 
South Pole magnets run through the coil's wire crosswise, and some run through 
the coil's wire lengthwise. 



Kaybe you think that it is not fair to use iron wire to demonstrate how magnetic currents 
are made but I can tell you that if t do not use iron core in the coil I con **k* more of 
the magnetic currents with soft iron wire coil than I can with copper wire coil. So you see 
it is p<?r‘eccly good to use iron wire to demonstrate how magnetic currents are made. You 
can do the son* thing with the copper wire in using iron filings, but only on a smaller 
scale. 



uxaneric cuaxaa By ££**» LkspSkauitv. rccr. oatx i»45 


35 


You saw how Che magnets are running through a wire crosswise. 

Now I will tell you how they are running through the wire lengthwiao. 

Before the magnets start to run through the wire lengthwise they are lined up 
in a square across the wire, one side of the wire is North Pole magnet side 
and the other side is South Pole magnet side. 


•*' •• 



.. > 


When the coil begins to approach the middle of the U shape magnet and the 
currents begin to run then the magnets which are in the wire begin to slant. 
North Pole magnets pointing East the same as the coil's wire end, where the 
North Pole magnet current came out and South Pole magnets pointing West the 
same as the coil's wire end where the South Pole magnet cur-rent came out. 

A 





O 

V 

When the coil reaches the middle of the U shape magnet then the currents stop 
to run. Now the North and South Pole magnets are pointing across the wire 
again. 



When the coil begins to move away from the middle of the U shape magnet and 
the currents begin to run then the magnets which are in the wire begin to 
slant, but this time the North Pole magnets are pointing West the same as the 
coil's wire end where the North Pole magnet current come out ar.d South Pole 
magnets pointing East the same as the coil's wire end where the South Pole 
magnet current came out. * 


O 



• 

t 

V 

When the coil moves out of the U shape magnet's effective distance the 
currents running stop. 


This is the way the alternating currents are made. (*P cv***NT) 




K&CKrrxc cuMtw rr Dy iskjuO l-PfESKM-Vis. «OCK 8ATK 1944 


36 


When the individual North and South pole magnets are running through a wire 
lengthwise they are running in slant and whirling around while running ahead. 



You can see the slant by watching the sparks when you are putting together and 
pulling away soft iron wire ends which are connected to the battery by their 
other ends. 



To see how the currents are ru nn ing out of the coil's wire watch those six one- 
inch long magnets which lie on the glass. 


• Put those magnets together with ends oven, then let them loose, 

then you will see that they will roll away and if the magnets be stronger then 
they will roll away farther. 

This is the way the North and South Pole individual magnets are running out of 
the coil's wire lengthwise. 



mukbtic cujuuhst By EMN19 uomSKAUnN. K*cx g * tt . MM 


37 


The reason the North and South Pole individual magnets do not run across through 
the co'l's wire as fast out as they run in while the coil is between the U shape 
magnet the coil's wire is insulated, there is an air space around every wire and 
as it is known that the dry air is the best obstruction for the magnets to go 
through and as you know the coil is well insulated so the damp air does not get 
in. It is well known that it is many times easier for the magnets to run in metal 


than in air. 




now you see when the magnets run in the wire they hesitate to run out of the wire 
across the same way as they came in, so more of the new magnets are coming xn the 
wire crosswise, then they can get out crosswise, eo they get pushed out through 


the wire lengthwise. 



Now you know how the alternating magnetic currents are made. 

You have been wondering why alternating currents can run so far away from their 
generators. 


One reason is between every time the currents start and stop there is no pressure 
In the wire so the magnets from the air run in the wire and when the run starts 
chore already are magnets in the wire which do not have to come from the 
generator, sc the power line itself is a small generator which assists _ne big 
generator to furnish the magnets for the currents to run with. 



VI 

currents on a small scale from the air without 


I have a generator that generates 
using any -magnets around it. 



KAGNHTtC CUM&MT By EMMI0 ROCK GATS. 194$ 


38 


Another thing, you have been wondering how a U shape permanent magnet can keep 
its normal strength indefinitely. You know the soft iron does not hold magnets, 
but you already have one that holds it. 

It is the perpetual motion holder. It illustrates the principle how permanent 
magnets are- made. 

All that has to be done is to start the magnets to run in on orbit, then they 
will never stop. 




Hard steel U shape magnets have a broken orbit, but under proper conditions it. is 
permanent. 


I think Che structure of the metal is the answer. I have two U shape magnets. 
They look alike, but one is a little harder than the ocher. The harder one can 
lift three pounds more than the softer one. I have been tempering the other steei 
magnets, and have noticed that the harder the steel gees the smaller it becomes. 
That shows that the metal is more packed and has less holes in it so the magnets 
cannot pass through it in full speed, so they dam up in the prong ends. They come 
in faster than they can get out. 


I think -the ability for the soft steel welding rod to hold magnets is in the 
metal’s fine structure. 


The reason I call the results of North and South Pole, magnet’s functions magnetic 
currents and not electric currents or electricity is the electricity is connected 
too much with those non-existing electrons. If it had been called magnetxcity 
then I would accept it. Magneticity would indicate that it has a magnetic base 
and so it would be all right. 



nctarnc cvwar By EDMXHO uscwxaikik. sock <Ht J*«5 


39 


As I said in the beginning, the North and South Pole magnets they are the 
cosmic force. They hold together this earth and everything on it, and they 
hold the moon together too. The moon's North end holds South Pole magnets the 
same as the earth's North end. The moon's South end holds North Pole the same 
as the earth's South end. Those people who have been wondering why the moon 
does not come down all they have to do is to give the moon one-half of a turn 
so that the North end would be in South side, and the South end in the North 
side, and then the moon would come down. At present the earth and moon have 
like magnet poles in the same sides so their own magnet poles keep them 
apart, but when the poles are reversed, then they will pull together. Here is 
a good tip to the rocket people. Make the rocket's head strong North Pole 
magnet, and the tail end strong South Pole magnet, and then lock on the 
moon's North end, then you will have better success. 

North and South Pole magnets are not only holding together the earth and 
moon, but they are turning the earth around on its axis. Those magnets which 
are coming form the sun are hitting their own kind of magnets which are 
circulating around the earth and they hit more on the East side than on the 
West side, and that is what makes the earth turn around. North and South Pole 
magnets make the lightning, in earth's North hemisphere the South Pole 
magnets are going up and the North Pole magnets are coming down in the same 
flash. The North lights are caused by the North and South Pole magnets 
passing in concentrated streams, but the streams are not as much concentrated 
as they are in the lightning. The radio waves are made by the North and South 
Pole magnets. Now about the magnet size. You know sunlight can go through 
glass, paper and leaves, but it cannot go through wood, rock and iron, but 
the magnets can go through everything. This shows that each magnet is smaller 
than each particle of light. 
