Zeus sent a flood to destroy the men of the Bronze Age.
Prometheus advised his son Deucalion to build a chest. All
other men perished except for a few who escaped to high
mountains. The mountains in Thessaly were parted, and all
the world beyond the Isthmus and Peloponnese was
overwhelmed. Deucalion and his wife Pyrrha (daughter of
Epimetheus and Pandora), after floating in the chest for
nine days and nights, landed on Parnassus. When the rains
ceased, he sacrificed to Zeus, the God of Escape. At the
bidding of Zeus, he threw stones over his head; they became
men, and the stones which Pyrrha threw became women. That
is why people are called laoi, from laas, "a
stone." [Apollodorus,
1.7.2]
The first race of people was completely destroyed
because they were exceedingly wicked. The fountains of the
deep opened, the rain fell in torrents, and the rivers and
seas rose to cover the earth, killing all of them.
Deucalion survived due to his prudence and piety and linked
the first and second race of men. Onto a great ark he
loaded his wives and children and all animals. The animals
came to him, and by God's help, remained friendly for the
duration of the flood. The flood waters escaped down a
chasm opened in Hierapolis. [Frazer,
pp. 153-154]
An older version of the story told by Hellanicus has
Deucalion's ark landing on Mount Othrys in Thessaly.
Another account has him landing on a peak, probably Phouka,
in Argolis, later called Nemea. [Gaster, p. 85]
The Megarians told that Megarus, son of Zeus, escaped
Deucalion's flood by swimming to the top of Mount Gerania,
guided by the cries of cranes. [Gaster, p. 85-86]
An earlier flood was reported to have occurred in the
time of Ogyges, founder and king of Thebes. The flood
covered the whole world and was so devastating that the
country remained without kings until the reign of Cecrops.
[Gaster, p. 87]
Nannacus, king of Phrygia, lived before the time of
Deucalion and foresaw that he and all people would perish
in a coming flood. He and the Phrygians lamented bitterly,
hence the old proverb about "weeping like (or for)
Nannacus." After the deluge had destroyed all humanity,
Zeus commanded Prometheus and Athena to fashion mud images,
and Zeus summoned winds to breathe life into them. The
place where they were made is called Iconium after these
images. [Frazer, p. 155]
"Many great deluges have taken place during the nine
thousand years" since Athens and Atlantis were preeminent.
Destruction by fire and other catastrophes was also common.
In these floods, water rose from below, destroying city
dwellers but not mountain people. The floods, especially
the third great flood before Deucalion, washed away most of
Athens' fertile soil. [Plato,
"Timaeus" 22, 
"Critias" 111-112]