The woman Gulbin traveled from the south, looking for a
place to put herself as djang. At length, she killed
a snake, began cooking it, and slept while it cooked. But
the snake was the daughter of She who lives underground.
That snake made water rise, threatening to drown the woman,
and at last the Snake came up and ate her. Later the Snake
vomited her bones, which became like rock. [Berndt & Berndt, pp. 84-85]
Two girls traveled, making places. With fires, they
attracted two men to marry them. But one day the four of
them killed the daughter of Ngalyod, the Rainbow Snake. The
mother came looking for her child, and they saw storm and
rushing water coming. They tried to escape by climbing
rocks, but the water rose and drowned them. The Snake ate
them, carried their bones for a long time, and vomited them
out in the same place, named Malbaid. They became like
rocks. [Berndt & Berndt, pp.
279-280]
The first people were living in what is now the middle
of the sea. In ignorance, some of them knocked a
maar rock, a dangerous Dreaming rock. After they
went home, rain fell for a long time, and fresh water came
running in search of them. In panic, the people swam around
trying to get to dry land. There was no place they could go
except for the rock Aragaladi, but Aragaladi was not a real
rock; Snake had made it rise up for them. Snake came
looking for the people, urinating salt water. A man came
from the mainland in a canoe, but he drowned in the middle
of the sea. Snake came and swallowed the people and later
vomited their bones. She made the place deep with sea
water. Those first people became rocks. Nobody goes to
Aragaladi now. [Berndt & Berndt,
pp. 88-89]
An orphan boy was crying because the people in the
community were preoccupied with a circumcision ritual and
didn't feed him well. When his brother returned from
hunting and saw how thin he was, he told the people, "I'm
very sorry for my little brother. I'll finish all of you!"
He took Rainbow eggs and broke them, and water "jumped out"
and spread. The man took his brother up a hill, where he
became a rock. He went further up and became a rock
himself, along with his baskets. [Berndt
& Berndt, pp. 93-94]
Some people came from north and danced the
nyalaidj ceremony. While they danced, one girl
climbed a pandanus palm and was calling out, and an orphan
boy was crying. The people kept dancing. The crying and
calling upset the place, and water came up from underneath.
The people cried in fear, but they couldn't run away
because the ground became soft, and the water covered them.
Ngalyod the Rainbow Serpent ate them, first the people who
were calling out and the orphan who was crying. The name of
the place is Gaalbaraya; it is still a taboo place. [Berndt & Berndt, pp. 96-97]
All the honeycombs that a man cut out were no good. He
went on and cut and ate a palm tree. He heard bees talking,
saying "Gu-gu" ["water"]. He ran back to others and told
them that he had unknowingly done wrong to a djang
palm tree. They tried to burn the tree, but water came up
from it. One girl ran up a hill calling out; the others
climbed a manbaderi tree. The tree fell, and those
in it drowned. The girl became a rock. The place is named
Gudju-mandi; nobody goes there now. [Berndt & Berndt, pp. 100-101]
Two were traveling during the Dreamtime. One fell sick,
and the Wuraal bird came up. The other heard it and said,
"Maybe we're making ourselves wrong, coming into Dreaming."
That night, the bird repeatedly struck the dying one with
its claws, killing him. Water came up where it struck him.
The other tried to outrun the rising water, but he fell in
a hole, and all three went underwater and came into
Dreaming. [Berndt & Berndt, p.
194]