The world wanted to come to an end. A llama buck,
knowing that the ocean would soon overflow, was depressed.
When its human owner complained that it wouldn't eat, the
llama told him that the flood would occur in five days and
suggested they go to Villca Coto mountain with five days'
food. The man left in a hurry, carrying both the llama and
the supplies. They arrived at the mountain to find the peak
already filled with all kinds of animals. The flood came as
soon as they arrived and lasted five days, then it dried to
the ocean's normal position. The fox's tail was soaked,
which turned it black. Afterwards, the man began to
multiply once more. [Salomon &
Urioste, pp. 51-52]
Paria Caca, a god born from five falcon eggs, heard
about a man called Tamta Namca who called himself a god and
had himself worshipped, and about other people's sins. He
went into a rage, rose up as rain, and washed them all away
to the ocean, together with their homes and llamas. At that
time a tree called the Pullao formed an arch between the
Llantapa and Vichoca mountains; in it lived monkeys,
toucans, and other birds. These too were swept to sea. [Salomon & Urioste, pp. 59-60]
Paria Caca went to the village Huauqui Usa, which was
celebrating a festival. He sat at the end of the banquet
like a stranger. No one offered him a drink while he sat
there, until at the end of the day a woman finally did so.
Paria Caca told the woman that these people had made him
mad, told her that in five days something terrible would
happen to the village, and warned her to take her family
away and not to tell anyone else, or he might kill her,
too. Five days later, the woman and her family left. The
other villagers continued drinking without a care. Paria
Caca climbed Matao Coto, a mountain which overlooks the
village, and rising up as red and yellow hail, caused a
torrential rainstorm. It washed all the villagers to the
ocean and shaped the slopes and valleys of the area. [Salomon & Urioste, pp. 61-62] He
similarly exterminated another village where no one offered
him a drink. [Salomon & Urioste,
p. 127]
The Inca summoned people from every village to help
defeat their enemies. Paria Caca sent his child Maca Uisa.
When nobody else at the meeting offered to help, Maca Uisa
said he would defeat the enemies completely. Strong litter
bearers carried him to the battle front, and as soon as he
got there, he started raining on them, gently at first,
then pouring rain. He washed away their villages in a
mudslide and killed their strong men with lightning bolts.
Only a few common people were spared. [Salomon & Urioste, p. 115]