CHAPTER 1
Animal Behaviour
Ever since I first became interested in genetics, it has always
intrigued me that such an important part of our anatomy, the genome, a
molecular structure so refined should have been created incomplete.
Actually, the truth is that the genome was created in abundance with large
parts of the structure that are not being used at all. It is as if the inactive
parts of the genome are waiting for some extrinsic factor to switch them
on. The question begs, which unimaginable characteristics or super
abilities are the dormant parts of the genome not controlling? What
human abilities are they hiding? And how has this affected our evolution
as a species?
The genome is just another name for the full complement of genes and
DNA contained by an individual. In humans, the genome consists of 23
pairs of chromosomes, which contain the entire genetic programme for
that specific individual and is located in the nucleus of every cell in our
bodies. This genetic programme controls all the information that allows
us to grow and function. Our genome is unique for every individual and
every species. When we are born, we are blissfully unaware of what
awaits us. There might be seven ages of man, but it all ends up woven
together into a long reality performance directed by some invisible force.
We are all given some 70 years to do our performance here on Earth, on
average; the rest is up to each one of us. Enter stage left… exit stage
right. The only certainty we have at present is that we will exit. What are
you going to do with your 70 years? What is the purpose of this journey,
this play of life that we all participate in? Will you use this time
creatively, make a contribution to the global community of beings or will
you be a mere spectator; a usurper of facilities before you exit stage
right?Despite the 6.5 billion people who populate the Earth, the human race
is a rather fragile and primitive species. No matter how intelligent and
smart we think we are, we constantly display signs of basic animal
behaviour that can lead to the destruction of our kind in the blink of an
eye. We have waged war on our fellow man throughout history and
continue to do so into the 21st century. There always seems to be a moral
high ground or justification for our action. From Cain and Abel to George
W. Bush, it has always been the strong and powerful who oppress and
wipe out the weak. The old testament of the Bible is not a pretty tale of
compassion and forgiveness. In fact, quite the opposite. It talks about an
eye for an eye; wiping out man, woman, child and beast in the name of
God and often mentions the enemy by name, personifying them as the
'bad' guys or disciples of the devil. It seems that God has been taking
sides from the very beginning. He had his favourites and then there were
‘the others’. I always felt that the God I have been told about should be
more impartial and loving.
The Bible is filled with prophets and other individuals who for
thousands of years had a direct link to God and who on a regular basis
received instructions from God to do certain things. When reading the
Bible it is not only deemed normal but it is expected of us to take for
granted that we believe that a number of ‘chosen’ people received such
regular instructions from God. Not only did they receive clear
instructions and warnings, they received physical instructions in the form
of the Ten Commandments and rewards of a material kind, such as land
or cattle. But the most impressive interactions between God and man
were the many visitations God made in person to various individuals. If
he could not make it in person, he would send ‘angels’ to deal with
whatever situation needed to be dealt with. The divine beings would share
ideas, share wine and bread and inevitably God would instruct the person
to perform certain tasks. All of these individuals seem to have been men.
And all of the people who contributed to the scriptures of the Bible were
also all men. If ‘He’ created us all equal, did God have a problem with
the credibility of women? Or was God just the personification of a maledominated society? The simple historic fact remains that God actually
physically interacted with man. Today, such claims of a physical
interaction with God would draw strong criticism and ridicule. Why is
that? Is it perhaps that such events in prehistory cannot affect us here
today? We seem to accept it when it happened in ancient history, almost
reduced to some fantastic fairy tale of our struggle for freedom. Or is it
simply because we are too scared to analyse the facts for fear of
victimisation if we place such arguments in the public domain? These
questions have troubled me for most of my life.
And who decided that the Bible had reached its conclusion and when;
that it was now enough, it is now the end and the final chapter must be
written? Obviously this was another man, inspired by God and dictated to
by the Holy Spirit! Surely the quest for truth and salvation continues?
Surely the atrocities on Earth have not abated; surely the people of the
Earth need ongoing guidance and instructions from God on how to deal
with modern day mayhem and crime; how to respond to dictators; how to
survive colonisation, racism, invasions and other inventions of ‘evil’
minds. Our capacity for cruelty as a species has reached unbearable
proportions. We make rules as civilised beings, only for them to be
abused and used against us by less civilised individuals with a good
knowledge of the legal system. Those who preach peace and love and
turning the other cheek have become the weakened victims of their own
philosophy.
Now, more than ever, people need salvation. They need something real
to believe in and to hold onto in times when all hope seems to have
vanished. So why are the scriptures not ongoing? Why is God not
dictating more wisdom through one of his prophets? Or many of his
prophets? Some say He is. Many claim they are in contact with God on a
regular basis. Many convey God’s messages in packed churches and other
places of worship. How does the global community respond to
individuals who make fantastic claims of miracles and hearing God’s
voice and having the answer? Well, in many cases these modern prophets
rise to a cult status with a blind following of disciples who will respond
to every command while in other cases they are reduced to cranks with aloose screw.
So, how should a judge in the 21st century respond to a guy who tied up
his ten-year-old daughter to a table in the back yard and who was caught
by police in the process of stabbing her to death or slitting her throat? If
he claims that God had instructed him to sacrifice her to prove his
obedience to the Almighty Lord, should such a character be seen as an
example of a modern faithful or a psychopath? Yet we look at Abraham
as a faithful man of God with strong principles and a leader of men
because he obeyed God’s instructions to kill his own son. The Bible
however calls it ‘sacrifice’. Would we see it as such if it happened today
in a wealthy suburb of Johannesburg or Paris?
It is truly a confusing state of religious activity out there. Thousands of
religions, all of them man-made, all claiming that they have the answer.
Only ‘their’ followers will be saved by the maker and bask in the
pleasures of paradise. It seems that the more money they have, the more
power they wield and the closer to God’s ear they can get.
And so the religious argument begins and we clearly display the
primitive side of our low evolutionary state. Are these the primitive
characteristics that could be controlled by the inactive genes? We look at
the past great civilisations and somehow feel superior. The fact that we
cannot explain many things from prehistory is quickly discarded as ‘who
cares about the Egyptians… they’re all dead’. In the light of all our
achievements and scientific discoveries, the more we evolve, the stronger
the religious dogma becomes. It seems that the religious dogma, which
could also be called fanaticism in this case, is directly linked to money.
The wealthier a nation, the more they can enforce their particular
religious views on others. The USA may claim that they are a ‘free’
society in all respects but that is mainly because they feel a sense of
comfort among their 96% Christian community. It is safe for them to
allow the minority ‘rogue’ religions to waste their time on their own
meaningless salvation.
But then we start to look at who we really are and the road we have
travelled as a species on this planet, only to realise that our presence heredoes not even equate to the ‘tip of the iceberg’. We marvel at dinosaur
fossils and talk about what it must have been like here on Earth when
dinosaurs roamed. We throw around numbers like ‘60 million years’,
when they were extinct; ‘200 million years’ when T-Rex caused havoc
and ‘400 million years’ ago really makes us gasp at the fossils of insects
in the museums. Then we start comparing the timescale to famous events
in our own frame of reference. The First World War 100 years ago;
Leonardo da Vinci 500 years ago; the Vikings some 1,200 years ago;
Mohammed some 1,400 years ago; Jesus 2,000 years ago; the pyramids
4,000 years ago; the last ice age some 13,000 years ago; by then most of
us run out of reference points.
And then one day something miraculous happens. We lift our eyes up
at the night sky filled with billions of stars and we try to imagine infinity.
Someone points out Mars and Jupiter. And then you look through a
telescope and for the first time you see Saturn with its rings and even
several of its moons, and suddenly the reality of it all changes somewhat.
It all becomes a little bit bigger. You look at Alpha Centauri and realise
that the light from the closest star to us takes five years to reach us,
travelling at 300,000 km per second. You go to a lecture by an
astronomer and see pictures of galaxies so far away it is impossible to
imagine the distance. Galaxies a billion light years away. Super-cluster
galaxies five billion light years away; ultra hot quasars some 12 billion
light years away right at the edge of the known universe and then… some
13.8 billion light years away… just blackness. Nothing. You sit in silent
contemplation as you try to digest the reality of what you have just
witnessed. You have just looked beyond the edge of the known universe,
where nothing exists.
But when you wake up in the morning and you try to explain your
epiphany to a group of close friends, they share your excitement for
exactly 15 seconds before one of them pronounces, “Hey, did you guys
check that lekker (nice) movie on TV last night?”
With all the valiant attempts and sometimes remarkable discoveries by
archaeologists, we still cannot pinpoint the origin of Humankind. Oh,
scores of scientists will argue and give you all kinds of evidence andproof, only to be rewritten by some new scientist five years from now. It
is all calculated speculation presented to us either as scientific
hypotheses or religious dogma. But in reality, all it ends up being is more
manipulation of the pieces of the Great Human Puzzle. We cannot tell
when civilised man first walked the Earth and we cannot tell when man
was created or how man evolved with a definite level of certainty.
Lets face it, the past two centuries have led to amazing discoveries of
ancient civilisations, lost cities and a closer understanding of the people
who developed these ancient cultures that displayed remarkable
knowledge and understanding of science and the cosmos. It has taken us
decades to decipher the various texts or styles of writing by the many
extinct cultures. With all our knowledge and sophistication, we have not
deciphered the Balkan-Danube script and the Indus Script to date. The
diversity of these ancient civilisations, from the ancient Chinese, various
cultures of the Americas and the hieroglyphs of the Egyptians to the
cuneiform scriptures of the Sumerians and the lost cities of Asia, have
baffled historians and archaeologists alike. It has taken us by complete
surprise to discover ancient libraries, such as the library of King
Ashurbanipal at Nineveh, with around 30,000 cuneiform clay tablets of
scriptures that point to great knowledge by lost civilisations.
It is curious to discover the extensive knowledge of astronomers as
early as six thousand years ago with detailed information of our own
solar system, describing it in great detail. We read about ancient gods
who roamed and ruled the Earth in chariots that flew in from the stars and
about conflicts and betrayal between these ancient gods. We read about
brave men who achieved great things in the distant past and wisdom,
which was imparted to man by the many gods who came from the stars.
The ability to extract precious metals from ore in the ground and the the
production of gold, copper, tin and bronze as early as nine thousand years
ago points to clear understanding of metallurgical procedure. The ancient
ruins of the Americas with visible extraction and mining activity explain
why there was an unimaginable wealth of gold in this part of the world
long before Columbus, Cortes or the other savages who set foot there
only a few hundred years ago. The further inexplicable evidence of oremining in southern Africa as far back as 100,000 years ago is simply too
much for even the bravest of archaeologists to accept.
The knowledge of medical procedure and genetic manipulation, the
creation of the ‘Adamu’ and a new species is clearly documented in
ancient tablets, which have only recently been understood by so-called
intelligent man. The power of wireless communication and geophysical
knowledge to anticipate natural disaster; all this wealth of information
stares us bluntly in the face. And yet we cannot come to terms with the
fact that we may not be the pinnacle of intelligence that has inhabited the
planet. Since the rapid evolution of the computer, our ability to document
and match this ancient wisdom has enabled us to understand it more
clearly. But what do we do with all this information when standing face-
to-face with incredible tales from prehistory? We have two choices.
Either we believe that it has been left for future civilisations to use and
build upon or we discard it as hallucinogenic garbage by some primitive
idiots from a stone age, not worthy of our attention.
But the fact that only 500 years ago men were burnt at the stake for
suggesting that Earth was not the centre of the universe; the human body
was a mysterious vessel that was studied and dissected by daring
scientists risking their lives in the early hours of the morning; that we
only discovered the last three planets in our solar system in the past 200
years are clear indications that we are not the super race.
We are the sub-species. Our arrogance is our weakness and our
ignorance, a congenital disease that will eventually destroy us. The
dogma has consumed us and the fear controls us. But why are we so blind
to the facts and evidence that surround us? Why are we so obsessed with
popular religions that mostly bow to a god who uses retribution and
punishment as a form of control? If we all come from the same maker,
we should all have the same set of rules on how to obey that maker, but
this is clearly not the case. Religious conflict has torn our history apart
for millennia and still hangs over our heads into the 21st century like a
cancer waiting to devour us.
In this book we will discover that our disorder is the direct result of ourbastard race status, with unpredictable animal behaviour lurking in our
manipulated double helix DNA. Our intelligence has been suppressed, our
knowledge has been erased, our lifespan has been genetically shortened
and our memory has been removed. We are an inferior, genetically
cloned mutation of the great civilisations of the past, left behind to pick
up the pieces or to put together the pieces of the Great Human Puzzle.
We have made remarkable progress in the field of genetic engineering
but just because we have been able to ‘map’ the genome does not mean
we know everything about it. On the contrary. The more we learn about
the genome, the more we marvel at its complexity. We seem to
understand the basic principle of the double helix, but we are far from
understanding all its functions. What we are especially perplexed by are
the large sections that seem to be ‘switched off’. Yes, it is curious to
learn that there are large parts of the genome that are not active. Ever
since I first became interested in the study of the genome, I have been
fascinated by the strange phenomenon, that such a masterful part of our
anatomy, a molecular structure so refined, should have been created
incomplete. That kind of discovery flies directly in the face of all
evolutionary processes. But the real truth is that the genome was created
in abundance, with far more DNA in our cells than we need for our
primitive form. It is as if the inactive parts of the genome are waiting for
some extrinsic factor to switch them on.
This begs the question, if the genome controls all our characteristics
and bodily functions, then what is it that is not controlled by the inactive
parts of the genome? I firmly believe that this is the ultimate question of
humanity. What inert secret powers are being locked up behind the
inactive parts of our genetic structure?
Let’s take a quick look at the history of genetic discovery. While there
is clear evidence of prehistoric genetic activity and manipulation dating
back to some 250,000 years ago, modern man has only rediscovered the
genome in the 1950s.
In 1866 Gregor Mendel published the results of his investigations of
the inheritance of ‘factors’ in pea plants but it was only in the 1950s that
the chemical structure of the DNA was rediscovered by modernscientists. They finally had a name for it: Deoxyribonucleic acid. The
people involved in this breakthrough were Maurice Wilkins, Rosalind
Franklin, Francis H. C. Crick and James D. Watson. With this discovery
they started a whole new branch of science, namely molecular biology. In
the same decade, Watson and Crick made history when they made the
first model of the DNA molecule, showing its twisted double helix
structure, and proved that genes determine heredity. In 1957, Arthur
Kornberg produced DNA in a test tube. 1963 saw F. Sanger develop the
sequencing procedure for proteins. By 1966, a real breakthrough was
made when the genetic code was discovered. Scientists were now able to
predict characteristics by studying DNA. This very quickly evolved into
genetic engineering and genetic counselling.
In 1972, Paul Berg produced the first recombinant DNA molecule and
in 1983 Barbara McClintock was awarded the Nobel Prize for her
discovery that genes are able to change position on chromosomes. In the
late 1980s, an international team of scientists began the tedious and
demanding task of mapping the human genome and the first crime
conviction based on DNA fingerprinting, in Portland Oregon took place.
By 1990 gene therapy was used on patients for the first time. In 1993 Dr.
Kary Mullis discovered the PCR procedure, for which he was awarded the
Nobel prize. In 1994, the FDA approved the first genetically engineered
food. These were FlavrSavr tomatoes engineered for better flavour and
shelf-life.
By 1995, criminal DNA forensics made headlines in the O.J. Simpson
trial. In 1997, Dolly the Sheep was cloned as the first adult animal clone.
1998 saw the senate inquiry into the Clinton/Lewinsky scandal based
largely on DNA evidence and in the year 2000, J. Craig Venter, along
with Francis Collins, jointly announced the completion of the mapping
and sequencing of the entire human genome. This was a major
achievement that took almost 10 years less than originally expected. In
2003, Craig Venter launched a global expedition to obtain and study
microbes from environments ranging from the world’s oceans to urban
centres. This mission will yield a definitive insight into genes that make
up the vast realm of microbial life. And now the true genetic era is uponus. The first pet cloning company opened their doors for business in the
USA in 2004. In essence, we have become the creators of species. And so
we have become ‘God’ to those species we create.
The more we discover in the Cradle of Humankind in South Africa, the
more we can genetically link the various peoples of the world to half a
dozen original individuals in southern Africa; the more evidence we get
from female mitochondrial DNA that the first human was born around
250,000 years ago, the more the pieces of the puzzle seem to fit. In this
book we will explore written evidence that places such a group of
primordial humans in southern Africa some 200,000 years ago, at about
the time when 'Adam' was supposed to have been created. When I first
started placing these pieces together, I was doubtful that something so
fantastic could be a possibility. But if you allow yourself the freedom of
thought and possibility, you will discover an incredible story with a clear
vision of the past and you will begin to unravel the great steps of
humanity that brought us here.
This brings us to the age old question: 'Who are we… and why are we
here?' No, it is not really a ‘hey-shoo-wow’ kind of question, it is
possibly one of the most complex riddles of our species, which deserves a
fresh new look and possibly a slightly less conventional approach if we
want to reach new and refreshing answers. But then we must be prepared
to face answers we may not have expected. This is what I intend to share
with you in this book. What may at first seem like a horror story will turn
out to be the most liberating experience, one that brought me much closer
to God than I ever imagined possible. Once again I have to draw your
attention to the difference between God, the creator of the universe and
all things in it and ‘god’ one of many deities who walked the Earth over
millennia, wielding power, knowledge and technology with which they
ruled over humanity.
There is good news for those who believe in the ‘creation’ theory that
man was created by God and given certain rules to live by. Those who
believe in the evolutionary theory have a few surprises to face. Evidence
that has been uncovered and contained in the many Sumerian tablets
suggests that the ‘Adamu’ was created here on Earth in the image of his‘maker’. But who created Adam, and when, will reveal that he was
created by an advanced species of deities for a specific purpose here on
Earth some 200,000 to 250,000 years ago. We further learn from the
tablets that Adam was created from the genetic pool of the advanced
species of humans on Earth and a lesser evolved hominid that roamed in
southern Africa. But who were these ‘advanced humans’ and where did
they appear from? And why is there no fossil evidence of their existence?
I must once again remind you of the dilemma we face when we
contemplate such outlandish theories as most, if not all, of our facts come
from prehistoric clay tablets that have been deciphered over the last 50
years of the 20th century. We have to make a personal choice, whether we
believe that what was written in these tablets is close enough to the truth,
or whether it is merely some hallucinogenic garbage from a time when
people’s minds did not function properly. I, for one, have made my
decision to take at face value what has been written. I cannot imagine for
one minute that thousands of people spent millions of man-hours
painstakingly creating these tablets if their contents were less than
relevant. I am convinced that they had better things to do than trying to
confuse future generations about our origins. After all, we have not really
changed that much; we also want to leave evidence of our intellect and
achievements, not only for future generations but also for other advanced
species in the vastness of the universe. Why else would we send space
probes filled with human paraphernalia, videos, compact discs, books,
photographs, TV shows and other symbols of our existence into space? At
the back of our minds and against the belief of millions, there is the faint
hope that there may be advanced life somewhere in the universe. If there
is, we hope to dazzle it with our brilliance or disappoint them with our
ignorance, all depending on how evolved they may be by the time they
accidentally recover our earthly ‘space ark’.
It has always amazed me how many people show a complete disregard
for history. To many, what happened in the past simply does not matter.
But if we don’t know who we are and where we come from, how can we
possibly begin to understand where we might be going on our path ofprogress and evolution?
So we toil away and dream of better days. We close ourselves in
cocoons of comfort, position our blinkers squarely on our heads and try
not to step too far out of the lane of conformity. We believe that if we
work hard or if we work smart we will achieve some sort of reward at the
end of all of this. We take out insurance policies to reward our offspring
and retirement annuities to cruise through the last few years of our own
time on this planet. We keep procreating as if we were programmed to do
so. It seems to be a natural step in our maturing process. And unbeknown
to us, it is most likely driven by our genome in an attempt to continue
surviving while our DNA evolves towards its own completion. On this
path of evolution it unlocks the secret parts that have been switched off
by some alchemist in our distant past.
We pray for health, wealth and happiness. Some dream of eternal life
and many pray for salvation but deep inside there seems to bubble the
burning desire to find answers to the great human question… ‘Who am I
and why am I here?’.
History gives us many clues about who we might be and by stringing
together the events and behavioural patterns of humans in the past,
history does give us some clues as to where we are heading. Whether we
will survive to get there is another question altogether. History does not
however always clearly answer the question of who we are and where we
come from. Historians, archaeologists and anthropologists have painted a
very predictable past for us. Aside from the arguments between
creationists and evolutionists, the story of humanity and Humankind has
become an almost pretty fairytale and most humans do not want their
fairytale disrupted. Humanity rose from the ashes against all odds; we
survived and grew in numbers while spreading over the Earth. We
discovered fire, iron, bronze, silver and gold. We learnt new skills,
adopted farming instead of roaming, buried our dead, learnt to live in
structured communities, learnt to write and built cities to protect us from
the bad guys. Then we learnt to trade, found democracy, discovered
mechanisation, discovered technology and reached for the stars and all
the time we have been killing each other in the name of our God, ourking, or for some other perfectly justifiable reason. It is truly a miracle
that we have survived all this. It is clear that somewhere in our DNA
there is a violent gene that plays a prominent role in human behaviour.
This is a great story, but it only really deals with the past 6,000 years
or so. Prior to this it gets very murky and somehow the timing does not
seem to fit. The question of the missing link is now more relevant than
ever before. Our genome has certainly evolved to the point where we can
at least ponder these questions and challenge some of the obvious
conventions. But this evolution seems to be more spiritual or mental.
Physical evolution is debatable. If we have not really evolved physically
in the past 6,000 years since the Egyptians and Sumerians, why should we
believe that we underwent some dramatic evolution in the previous 6,000
years… or the 10,000 years before that? It appears that our genome has
been evolving around the mental parts only. As if we had some catching
up to do mentally. This kind of genetic imbalance seems to point to some
sort of tampering in the ancient past.
Survival of the fittest has been embraced as one of the pivotal
evolutionary arguments. Terms like ‘natural selection’ have been
introduced and presented with dramatic evidence. It may have been the
case in the protozoa, the dinosaurs or the horse but there seem to be
serious gaps in the prehistoric evolutionary patterns of humans. Dramatic
jumps in evolution, which will form part of my argument, point to the
horrible truth that we are a slave species, purposefully created to perform
a mundane function here on this Earth. It is for us to collect the clues and
string them together to formulate a sensible answer. Some will not find
any sense in my logic, but some will hopefully become more tolerant of
the unknown and the forbidden questions of the past. One of the highest
hurdles to cross, will be the real possibility that we might have to come to
terms with two gods. One with a capital ‘G’ and the other with a small
‘g’. The difference between the two should be obvious and our prehistory
seems to be filled with events that tend to favour the needs and whims of
the latter. Have we been conned since the beginning to believe that some
form of advanced deity was actually God? If so, did he give us the rules,
the scriptures and the punishment? Was it in his image that we werecreated? There is an overwhelming amount of written evidence pointing
to this conclusion. Do we start to take this ancient knowledge more
seriously, giving it the respect it deserves, or do we respond to our
overwhelming enslavement by dogma and discard all this ancient
knowledge? I will leave it up to you to draw your own conclusions.