CHAPTER 10
Instant Civilisation and Sumer
The word ‘civilisation’ is possibly one of the most misused words in
all the languages of the world. We constantly refer to issues surrounding
the ‘civilised’ world and compare quality of life between the developed
West and the emerging economies. There is constant reference to the
‘First World’ and the ‘Third World’, I would like to know what happened
to the clearly absent ‘Second World’? Or has the civilised world decided
that the gap between their superior lifestyle and the rest of the poor
bastards is so huge, that there is no case for a ‘Second World’ culture?
Although the word ‘civilisation’ does not carry an exclusive component
of distinction based on financial stability or wealth of its citizens, it
certainly seems to be coined as an indicator of such criteria. The media
talk about ancient civilisations with a mysterious tone which would
suggest that they were not really that civilised, but we just don’t
understand how those ‘low-lifes’ all those years ago could manage to
build such impressive monuments. Even historians, anthropologists and
archaeologists are guilty of waxing lyrically about the great civilisations
of the past, and yet they treat their scriptures and texts with an uncanny
lack of respect loaded with heaps of scepticism. It's as if the ancients had
some obscure reason to capture information aimed at misleading us poor
21st centurions. Our attitude is riddled with immense disbelief, as if there
was an ancient plot aimed at feeding us with disinformation; ‘us’ greatly
‘advanced’ humans in the modern days of technology.
By doing this, scholars inject a comparative system of levels of
civilisation, placing us at the pinnacle of all time civilisations for obvious
reasons to them. Ancient knowledge and so-called civilisation is
immediately and automatically superseded by us, because we live in
more recent times. We have to be more civilised because we havetechnology, we have mass media, we live in a free world where all truth
must eventually surface because we are too smart to be fooled by false
prophets. Is that a fact? I suggest we take a long hard look at how
manipulated and controlled we actually are. If civilisation was to be
penalised by some scale, based on human ignorance per capita, we would
be the most penalised bunch of humans of all times. We have looked
extensively at the possible origins of humanity, yet we still do not know,
we do not even suspect, where we come from. There is overwhelming
evidence that the ancient Sumerians knew exactly who they were, where
they came from and who their ‘real god’ was. The god of the Sumerians,
who had absolute controlling power and ruled the whole world. The god
with a small ‘g’ and his extended family, who were turned into a group of
fairytale mythological characters by latter civilisations. But that early
knowledge has somehow escaped us, just like the extensive knowledge of
the cosmos. Is it possible that for the same reasons we misplaced our
knowledge of astronomy, and our ability to relate to our ancestry?
Today, the majority of the world is so brainwashed with religion that
any breakthrough in knowledge of our shocking past is immediately
relegated to the realms of the esoteric or mythological or evil or cult or
heresy. We are so controlled by the media and advertising that we base
our decisions on the moods of soap opera characters. If we get wiped out
by a giant tsunami 200 metres high, when they uncover the dregs of our
civilisation some 20,000 years from now, will they think that the ‘soapie’
scripts and characters were actual events and real people? Hey, anything
is possible.
If we unravel the true meaning of civilisation, we will possibly see that
the population of the 21s t century is far from meeting the criteria. It is
quite discernable that there is a global split between ‘thinkers’ and
‘followers’. By this I do not mean that if you have a 9 to 5 job you are a
follower, but it’s rather a more direct stab at the mechanisms of fear that
are successfully implemented at controlling large groups of people.
Whether these are of political, religious or of any other origin. The 2004
USA elections are a perfect example. The majority of Americans votedfor George W. Bush because of this fear factor. They were so cleverly
manipulated by the media, that they truly believed their candidate would
protect them against the onslaught of the ‘evil’ world. To the rest of the
world it was very obvious as to what was going on in the USA, but the
average American truly believes that the world wants to invade them,
either by coming to live there and taking their jobs away or by spreading
terror. And the USA is apparently the most advanced economy in the
world, therefore the most civilised? I don’t think so. Therein lies the
proof. Just because we are more technologically advanced, does not give
us the collective capacity to reason, think or solve problems any better
than our ancestors did 6,000 years ago. In fact, Greece is probably best
known for its great thinkers, like Socrates, Aristotle and Plato. These
philosophers are quoted now more than ever before and their influence
has seeped into countless crevices of our societies. Just like dead artists
who carry a strange mystique that propels the price of their work to
dazzling heights, the dead philosophers from ancient times are more
revered now than during their own time.
I will bet that if you placed Plato in a live performance situation to
simply talk about his thoughts on life and death, he would fill every
football stadium on his world tour. We seem to accept their wisdom and
written works, but we will not accept the written works of other ancient
teachers, just because we don't know who they were. That is so very
shallow of us, that I feel embarrassed by such behaviour. But as popular
as those ancient wise men were, they were not seen as the prophets of
their day, even though they carried such a great deal of respect. Why
could that possibly be? The answer is clearly displayed in the chapter
dealing with Jesus and other prophets. We will discover in later chapters
that so-called prophets whom we have come to worship were cunningly
contrived and planted by the ‘gods’ of the day, while the ‘thinkers’ did
not fall into that category. The thinkers did not fit the profile of religious
leaders who would attract pilgrims in need of spiritual shelter. The
thinkers were too independent to be manipulated in such ways, it seems,
at times causing great trouble between the newly created slave species
and their gods.So what does the word civilisation actually mean? The dictionary
describes it as “an advanced stage of human development, marked by a
high level of art, religion, science, social and political organisation.” And
yet the word ‘civil’ means “belonging to, or consisting of the ordinary
population of citizens; not military or religious.” Immediately we see a
distinct conflict here, since religion is one of the criteria that marks the
levels of ‘civilisation’, yet it is explicitly excluded from being ‘civil’.
Political assassinations are as common in modern days as they were in
ancient times. And because war is declared by a political leader of a
country, it means that a president or a king can never be civil, or
civilised. The point is, the true meaning of the word is extremely obscure
and it is used as and when necessary by individuals who want to create a
distinction between themselves and others generally proclaimed to be
less civilised. But if we take the dissection a little further and actually try
to determine our current levels of civilisation from the definition, we
reach a rather interesting outcome. ‘High levels of art’ – we can say that
current artistic levels are pretty high around the world. Our writers, film
makers, theatres and painters are creating more than ever before, so we
score high marks there. Science – this is a tough area to judge, since there
is physical evidence that humans many thousands of years ago knew
more about science, medicine and astronomy than we know today. At
every archaeological dig in Mesopotamia, there are almost always clay
tablets found, some dating as far back as 3,800 BC, outlining the
achievements of the ancient Sumerian civilisations. They describe the
cosmos, planets, medical schools and medical procedure, surgery, eye
surgery, genetic engineering, space craft, space travel and much more.
Historians have however found these claims to be unbelievable and so
they have become part of mythology rather than history. Remember that
the father of modern anatomy, Leonardo da Vinci, was risking his life as
recently as 500 years ago by dissecting corpses in the middle of the night
so he could draw images of the internal organs. This was a time when the
church had complete control over people's lives, killing and destroying
anything that was not in keeping with their image of religious behaviour.
Unfortunately, we have inherited much of this behaviour and we arepractising it ‘religiously’ today. So, on the scale of scientific
advancement, we cannot say that we have surpassed the knowledge of the
distant civilisations. On the religious front we are less aware of the
human reality than the ancient people were, mainly for the reasons that
we have reduced their reality to the realms of mythology. If the
‘religious’ reference as a measure of civilisation is based on religious
tolerance, then we certainly are far less civilised today than our distant
ancestors. The last 1,000 years have seen the most brutal religious
conflicts in all of human history. My conclusion is that until we start to
treat the ancient texts and tablets with the kind of respect they deserve,
we will remain trapped in the cycle of ignorance that will keep a strangle-
hold on our current civilisation. How can we claim to have any levels of
real intelligence if we still do not know with certainty where we come
from? What kind of civilised species are we if we have no clear link to
our origins? How can we expect to find unity and harmony among the
cultures of the world when all our theories are driven by scattered groups
of disparate religions, each one claiming to be the correct one?
The fact remains that our ancient past is filled with incredible
achievements by many civilisations, which left behind traces and clues of
their rise and fall. Many of these civilisations writeabout the ‘prior times’ or the ‘times before
time’ or the ‘earlier times’, when they refer to where they had received
their knowledge from. In times when global communication was non-
existent, these groups of highly capable people settled in the distant
reaches of the world and began to develop highly structured cities with
colossal monuments and pyramids. From the more recent Japanese,
Chinese and Thai ruins, to the more romanticised Egypt, Near East,
Mesoamerica and the Andean civilisations in South America. To truly
demonstrate our modern arrogance and greed, all we have to do is look at
how Columbus and Cortes responded to the ancient cities and their people
when they first invaded the New World in the 15 th and 16th century. They
were so obsessed with looting gold and other artefacts, that they didn't
really give the incredible achievements that stared them in the face much
thought. The ‘greed’ gene was hard at work, driven relentlessly by the
‘conquering’ gene in those Conquistadores. How is it possible that those
civilisations could have appeared out of the blue, more or less at the same
time in history, displaying the kind of advanced knowledge of the cosmosand architecture, without even knowing about each other? There are many
more examples of such inexplicable ancient activity that are still
surrounded by wild speculation today. Easter Island, Stonehenge and the
Great Zimbabwe Ruins are just a few. But let's take a short trip through
some of these ancient sites to see how they all seem to be related to each
other. Let us try to answer the recurring question, who could have
possibly been responsible for such a connection in those ancient times?
The ever-present Anunnaki gods of course! As we work our way through
this book we will uncover that the ancient mythological gods in all of
human civilisation were not figments of the people's imagination. We
will also discover that they were not weird and supernatural
manifestations of the spiritual world; or any other hard-to-explain beings
from the fourth dimension. They were in fact a group of early explorers
and settlers on this planet under the leadership of Anu, their supreme
commander and hence their name, the Anunnaki. They are the ancient
astronauts who the Sumerian tablets speak about in great detail and we
will show beyond any doubt that the Anunnaki ruled the world for over
400,000 years, performing the roles of gods as they nurtured their
primitive creation, the ‘human slave species’ into a state of civilisation.
It was one of the members of the full extended Anunnaki family who was
in charge of the various activities on their newly settled planet, which
would have also included the Great Zimbabwe settlement. The full story
of the Anunnaki astronauts from Nibiru is told in great detail as it is
written in many hundreds of clay tablets. It is not very difficult to see that
it was they who crossed the skies in their ‘chariots’ and were equally
worshipped, while to a certain extent also feared, among all the ancient
civilisations on Earth. So do not panic, you will be enlightened with the
full story.Details from the Rosetta Stone showing 3
ROSETTA STONE different scripts in 2 languages - Egyptian and
Greek
The archaeologists of some 200 years ago were shocked when they first
started to scratch around in Egypt. Everyone believed that Greece was the
place that gave the world the concept of civilisation. Napoleon had heard
a great deal about these impressive ruins and pyramids, so when he
arrived in Egypt in 1799 with his army and an entourage of scholars, one
of his objectives was to help unravel the secrets of the pyramids. He
clearly did not achieve that, but what they did find in Rosetta, was a stone
slab which became known as the Rosetta Stone, and which has become
one of the most important archaeological finds ever. It measures 114 x 72
x 28 centimetres. For those in the USA this translates to 3ft 9 inches long,
and 2ft. 4,5 inches wide. The stone had three inscriptions. The Egyptian
hieroglyphic text was accompanied by a Greek translation which was
understood by scholars, and a third inscription on the stone was written in
Demotic, a cursive script developed late in Egyptian history, used almost
exclusively for secular documents. Thus the stone displayed the same text
in three scripts, but only two languages, Egyptian and Greek. It was
quickly discovered that all three contained the same message. And
because the Greek could be translated immediately, it provided real clues
for the very first time to the unravelling of Egyptian hieroglyphs.To a large extent this propelled the dissection and translation of the
hieroglyphic texts, only to astound the scholars with the news that the
Egyptian royal dynasties stretched back to around 3200 BC. This was
another typical example of our lowly-civilised state in the so-called
modern days, as it sent shockwaves through the archaeological worlds.
Very soon they discovered that the Hellenic alphabet, which influenced
the Latin and our own alphabets, actually emerged somewhere in the Near
East. The Greeks admitted that a Phoenician called Kadmus, originally
brought the alphabet from the East. It had the same number of letters and
the same order as in ancient Hebrew, but by the 5th century BC the poet
Simonides of Ceos increased the number of letters to 26. Alexander the
Great may have been a relentless warrior but he also collected much
information about the Persian empires which he defeated in 331 BC. His
advisers concluded that they must have originated from the Aryan people
or ‘lordly people’. According to his knowledge the mysterious ‘lordly
people’ appeared in the distant past near the Caspian Sea and spread East
all the way to India and further south to “the lands of the Medes and
Parsees”, as those lands were called in the pages of the Old Testament.
Cyrus the Great was an Aryan king and the founder of the Persian
Empire who conquered almost all of the known world some 200 years
before Alexander. The strange thing is that by the time Alexander rose to
power, the Aryans had settled and controlled all of Europe and were the
descendants of the same Aryan ancestors as the Persians. So what started
happening at this time was that Aryans were fighting Aryans without
actually realising it.
The newly emerging finds and clay tablets from the Near East caught
the interest of archaeologists, but it was only in 1843 when Paul Emile
Botta started the first professionally planned excavation in Mesopotamia.
The land which is modern day Iraq, between and surrounding the Tigris
and Euphrates Rivers, was producing remarkable treasures, many bearing
illegible cuneiform texts, which was the style of writing used by the
Sumerians. The name cuneiform was first coined in 1686 by Engelbert
Kampfer, who mistook the texts he saw in Persia to be decorative patterns
and described them as “cuneates”, which roughly means ‘wedge-shapedimpressions’. But as the wave of treasure seekers and archaeologists
poured into this part of the world to excavate Assyria and Babylonia,
thousands of cuneiform clay tablets were found among the many mounds
scattered throughout the region. There were even actual libraries of
tablets found, neatly bound together. One word was translated from the
cuneiform to be ‘Dur Sharu Kin’ which meant ‘walled city of the
righteous king’ whom we call Sargon II of Assyria. But that was not all
they unearthed. There were statues, bas-reliefs which would stretch for
longer than a mile if displayed; palaces, temples, houses, stables, towers,
warehouses, columns, gates, walls, terraces, gardens, decorations of a
wide variety and more mind-boggling evidence of a well developed
civilisation. But the centre-piece of the city was the 7-step ziggurat
pyramid referred to as ‘the stairway to heaven’ for the gods. All of this
took only five years to build some 3,000 years ago. This is a
demonstration of real achievement. Today, we cannot put a time-frame to
construction on such a scale. One other crucial bit of information they
acquired was that the common language of Assyria and Babylonia was
Akkadian. This was truly fascinating, but their surprise did not stop there.
There were post-scripts on many tablets, stating that they were copied
from earlier originals. Who could have written such originals? And where
are those originals now?
What is also interesting are the chief deities of the two cultures.
Assyrians had ‘Ashur’ the ‘all-seeing’ as their chief deity. Babylonia had
‘Marduk – the son of the pure mound’ as their chief deity. But the
pantheons of the two gods were the same, reconfirming our earlier
suggestions that the gods of prehistory were active over a wide area of the
world. According to the Akkadian tablets, the kingdom of Akkad was
started by Sharrukin, the “righteous ruler” who claimed that it was Enlil
who pointed out the land to him and allowed him to govern it. We will
discover that Sharrukin was not the only king who made such a statement,
there is written evidence of many more kings who attested to the same. It
was always some god who actually appointed them as the king of a
specific land and allowed them to govern the people while receiving
messages from his god. This is a very clear link to our pantheon of godswho ruled the world. Not only did they create the ‘slave species’ worker
to toil in the gold mines, but the evidence begins to pile up that they
introduced all aspects of civilisation to their human offspring sometime
between 9,000 BC and 3,000 BC all over the world, which included
kingship.
Suddenly we take a leap of 2,000 years back in time from Sargon of
Assyria 3,000 years ago, to Sargon of Akkad 5,000 years ago. Akkadian
was the first known Semitic language, before Hebrew, Aramaic (which
was the language of Jesus), Phoenician, and Canaanite. And this
Akkadian language was derived from an earlier one, which they refer to
in their post-scripts. But the most relevant information which was
obtained from these Akkadian tablets was a text dealing with the names,
genealogies, deeds, powers and duties of the gods. In Genesis there is a
wonderful reminder for some doubtful historians, about the actual
existence of a place called Akkad which was indeed started by Sargon,
who claims in the tablets that “at the wharf of Akkad, he made moor
ships” from lands far and wide.
Genesis:
“And the beginning of his kingdom: Babel and Erech and Akkad, all
in the land of Shin'ar.”
The excavations in Akkad delivered remarkable finds. The most precious
was the library of king Ashurbanipal at Nineveh, where they uncovered
25,000 tablets of Akkadian texts, many of which were once again
described to be copies of “olden texts”. Based on the syllabic style of the
Akkadian language, the scholars believed that it must have originated
from an earlier written language, similar to the Egyptian hieroglyphs.
Their suspicions were rewarded when one of the tablets from
Ashurbanipal ended with the following statement: “23rd tablet: language
of Shumer not changed.” But as outlined by Zecharia Sitchin, it was a
further text by King Ashurbanipal himself that really crowned the booty.
This is what it says:
“The god of scribes has bestowed on me the gift of the knowledge of
his art. I have been initiated into the secrets of writing. I can evenread the intricate tablets in Shumarian; I understand the enigmatic
words in the stone carvings from the days before the Flood.”
A MAP OF MESOPOTAMIA
Some of these tablets date back to the origin of the Akkadian empire
around 2350 BC and truly challenged the knowledge of historians of their
time and continue to challenge most of humanity today. Was it a bunch of
‘nonsensical’ garbage from days gone by, or was it a true historic entry
reflecting a real historical event? We need to make these choices once
more. The choice that will irrevocably alter the way we perceive our
human ancestry and our human origins. It was Frenchman Jules Oppert,
who suggested in 1869, that because the Mesopotamians proclaimed their
legitimacy by taking the title ‘King of Sumer and Akkad’ that we should
call the ancient peoples ‘Sumerians’ and their land should be called
‘Sumer’. And so his suggestions were adopted. Little did he know that the
old biblical name for Sumer was Shinar, as it states in Genesis that “the
royal cities of Babylon, Akkad and Erech were in the land of ‘Shinar’
(Shumer).” Suddenly the references on the Akkadian texts made sense.Among the many tablets they found, were long lists of words which made
no sense to anybody for long periods. But when the link between
Akkadian and Sumerian was made, scholars realised that the strange
‘wordy’ tablets were actually ancient dictionaries of Sumerian-Akkadian
words, which gave them a glimpse at the first written language on Earth.
This played a major part in speeding up the translations and
understanding of many ancient tablets, but it did not necessarily open the
minds of the translators. Over and over again, historians, anthropologists
and other scholars would restrict the Sumerian tales to the subject of
mythology. After all, we know it is impossible that there were all these
different ‘gods’ flying around the world all those years ago!!! We know
there is only one ‘god’… the god of the Bible, or Koran or Kabala, or
Hindus, or Buddhists, or Bahai, or so many others. In essence we are not
any different to the people of ancient times. Even today, different groups
of people pray to a different god. We seem to be quite okay with this
situation even in the 21st century. We all have our own faith and we all
steadfastly believe that our god is the real god. If we accept it today, why
can we not accept that it was so in the distant past as well? The only
difference was, that the ‘gods’ of the past had constant contact with
humans, as it states in the Bible, Koran or Sumerian scriptures. Those
gods were omnipresent, making their appearance in a flash, either in
person or sending ‘angels’ in their place.
It took 56 years of excavation to unearth the ancient city of Lagash in
Sumer. They began in 1877 and had not finished by 1933. But the effort
produced an unprecedented amount of archaeological material. We learnt
from the efforts of scholars and from very neatly preserved records at this
site, that the city had “righteous rulers” who were called ‘EN.SI’ and that
over a period of 650 years there were 43 EN.SIs who ruled Lagash. We
also learnt from the records that any EN.SI could only assume the throne
with the approval of the gods. Were these merely in their minds? And if
so, how could the rest of the population allow the king to assume the
throne if the gods were not visible or audible to the ordinary man? Surely
the people of the time would not have stood for it unless they wereconvinced that the new EN.SI was really appointed by god. A depiction of
Ur-Nammu, the ruler of Ur, was unearthed, in which he is depicted being
ordered to build a temple for his god according to strict instructions. But
other biblical heroes like Moses, Solomon and Ezekiel also built
buildings for their gods after being instructed. Solomon received
‘wisdom’ from god after which he built the temple in Jerusalem. Ezekiel
saw a godly vision of a person who had a bronze appearance who held a
measuring rod; and Moses built a ‘residence’ in the desert for his lord
after getting specific instructions on how to build it. So what is the
difference between the ancient kings receiving instructions from their so-
called mythological gods, and our popular biblical characters receiving
similar instructions from ‘our’ one and only biblical god? Nothing, I say.
The evidence is overwhelming to suggest that it was the same god or
gods, dealing with different people at different times. But one of the most
impressive constructions took place some 1200 years before Moses. King
Gudea recorded his instructions in a long detailed inscription. It talks
about a “man that shone like the heaven” and he “commanded me to build
his temple” and “from the crown on his head he was obviously a god”.
The god held some kind of stone in his hand “the plan of a temple it
contained”. The plan was so complex that he sought the advice of a
goddess who pointed out all the ‘right’ people or deities who could help
him. He then recruited 216,000 people to complete the job. An
undertaking on such a scale is unthinkable in the 21st century. But the
ability to coordinate, control, house and feed such a large number of
builders, indicates that the ancient Sumerian civilisation was well
advanced as far back as 3,000 BC.
But the real achievements of the Sumerians only became evident as the
tablets were transcribed and understood. It is now evident that Sumer was
the origin of all culture and civilisation on Earth, giving us all the
foundations of what we know today. The staggering thing is that the
knowledge of the Sumerians has been lost in translation or lost in
antiquity, because some of the activities they make reference to find us at
a loss, completely overwhelming the translators. Ancient Sumer had
thousands of scribes who worked relentlessly at capturing most of theirdaily activities. There were all kinds of scribes in temples, courts and in
trading houses. Junior scribes, high scribes and royal scribes, capturing
everything in clay. There is so much information captured about their
lives and activities that it leaves us with a very clear picture of how
organised they were. The records are not really of a spiritual nature but
instead they inadvertently indicate how controlled they were by their
demanding gods, who needed to be pleased on an ongoing basis. They
also speak of measuring fields, calculating prices and recording harvests
of crops.
SUMERIAN KING LIST
Probably the most important document ever discovered by modern
humans. It lists some 149 kings and rulers on planet Earth, starting
with ten rulers before the flood which spanned some 240,000 years. It
goes on to name rulers of many dynasties and outlines when
“kingdom” was lowered to Earth from Heaven by the Anunnaki, or
the biblical Nephilim. The list also outlines the coming to Earth of the
Igigi or biblical Anakim from their space colony. We also read that it
was Ninurta, the biblical YAHWEH, who destroyed Sodom and
Gomorrah.
Here is a quick overview of the Sumerian ‘firsts’. Besides their
architectural and engineering feats, they invented:
Writing - which included the precursor to the printing press. With their
cylinder seals engraved in hard stone, which could be rolled in clay
•
leaving a clear imprint; they could supply educational materials to
teachers and schools.• Schools - which were headed by ‘ummia’ – ‘the expert professor’.
There is evidence of corporal punishment at schools for being absent,
• lack of tidiness, loitering, making a noise, misbehaving and even
having untidy handwriting.
• They wrote pharmacopoeia and captured literary debates in clay.
They introduced the first bicameral congress; library catalogues; codes
•
of law; teaching methods and curricula; health and even exercise.
Sumerian textiles and apparel were so sought-after that invading armies
would fight over the spoils of clothing as it is mentioned in the book of
Joshua 7:21 that someone could not resist ‘one good coat of Shinar’,
• although such looting was punishable by death. 3,800 years BC they
had advanced weaving technology which also resulted in the ‘TUG’
later known as the Roman Toga. The Sumerians referred to it as the
‘TOG.TU.SHE’ or ‘the garment which is worn wrapped around’.
• Fashion, hairstyles and jewellery all originate from here.
They gave us the first mathematical system with the ability to do
• complex mathematical calculations which were based on the
‘sexagesimal’ system where 10 is combined with a ‘celestial’ 6 = 60.
The 360 degrees in a circle; advanced astronomy; the calendar; the 7-
day week; kilns; bricks; high-rise buildings like pyramids and
•
ziggurats; ceramics and even art and sculpture were all first created in
Sumer.
Furthermore there was metallurgy and the moulding of soft metals like
•
gold, silver and copper.
• The creation of bronze by smelting copper with tin.
They were the first to develop an exquisite range of decorative
•
jewellery.
They even introduced the first money in the form of the silver Shekel,
thereby converting thousands of years of what must have been a strictly
•
socialistic society without any use for money, into the first capitalist
economy.• Their extensive knowledge of agriculture was astounding. The planting
and harvesting of cereals; the manufacture of flour for different kinds
of breads, pastries, biscuits, cakes and porridges.
The Sumerian cuisine was well-refined and they certainly got a lot of
practice preparing lavishly extensive menus for their gods who had a
great appetite. Yes! The gods would actually demand different types of
food to be prepared and placed in their temples as offerings. This would
include wine from grapes and palm dates, milk yoghurts, butter, cream
and cheeses. The gods of the city of Uruk demanded five different
beverages and foods as a daily sacrifice. The Sumerians even wrote
poems about food.
Decimal
Sumerian (Sexagesimal)
“In the wine of drinking 1
1
In the scented water
10
10
In the oil of unction
10 X 10
10 X 6
This bird have I cooked (10 X 10) 10
(10 X 6) 10
and have eaten.”
(10 X 10 X 10) 10 (10 X 6 X 10) 6
SEXAGESIMAL COUNTING SYSTEM
The large library of King Ashurbanipal at Nineveh gave us a good insight
into their world of medical practice as they outline areas like therapy,
surgery and commands and incantations. It also covers subjects like fees
charged by surgeons and penalties that had to be paid if they messed up.
The surgeon would lose a hand if he damaged the patient's eye during a
temple procedure with a lancet. There is reference to ‘water physicians’
and ‘oil physicians’ or ‘A.ZU’ and ‘IA.ZU’ as referred to by Zecharia
Sitchin. They even refer to possible cataract removal and bone scraping.
A 5,000-year-old tablet found in Ur refers to a ‘Lulu the doctor’ and there
were even vets who were known as doctors of ‘oxen and asses’. All these
texts make it very clear that these people practiced medicine and not any
form of sorcery. On the social front they also introduced alcohol which is
evident from the Arabic and Akkadian roots of ‘kohl’ and ‘kuhlu’. This
was obviously also used in medical applications and some instructionswere given to use wine, beer or honey as solvents when taking powders
by mouth. And where do you think the Romans got their knowledge of
bitumen, asphalts and petroleum from, which they used so successfully in
building and warfare? From the Sumerians of course. The reference to the
discovery of the ancient city of Ur, claims that it was found under a
“mound of bitumen”. And the origin of the word ‘naphta’ comes from the
word ‘napatu’ which can be translated as ‘stones that flare up’. One of the
cornerstones of civilisation and development, the wheel, was also first
used by the Sumerians. Not to be outdone by those on land, the ship-
makers had their own dictionary which outlines 105 types of ships by
size, function and destination, and which also includes 69 Sumerian terms
for the construction of ships. There were 3 primary types of ships. Cargo,
passenger, and those exclusively used by the gods.
I trust that by now you must be thinking, that maybe there was a lot
more to the interaction between the so-called gods and our ancient
ancestor. But this is only the beginning. The evidence keeps piling up
higher and higher as we work through the clay tablets linking them to the
many activities and events of our distant past. We learn that the Anunnaki
gods were our original advanced ancestors who came to Earth with a very
specific purpose – gold! From their arrival on Earth in search of gold
some 443,000 years ago; to the creation of the ‘Adamu’ as a ‘lulu amelu’
or primitive worker; to the creation of ‘Eve’ shortly after that; to the
graphic descriptions of the hard work in the gold mines of southern
Africa; to the flood; and the subsequent civilisation that was bestowed on
the ‘slave species’ to help feed the flood survivors, while pushing ever
harder to extract enough gold to save their planet Nibiru's atmosphere.
What a mouthful… but what a ride. You are going to be amazed to see
how easily all the pieces of the puzzle fit together and you will question
why it has taken so long for the truth to start filtering through. The
answers are all written down for us to absorb, but you will discover how
our creators and ruling gods have carefully manipulated Humankind into
a subservient species, fearful of their god with a small ‘g’.
Back to the digs in Mesopotamia now: what was really impressive, was
the Sumerians’ sense of the law. For long periods it was thought that theAkkadian King Hammurabi set out the first code of laws in history, the
Code of Hammurabi. The excavations in Mesopotamia found otherwise.
Long before Hammurabi, who is said to have ruled around 1,792 -1,750
BC, there were several kings or rulers who were all instructed by their
‘god’ to write down and institute various codes of law. One such ruler
was from the city of Eshnunna. Some of the laws he was instructed to lay
down dealt with the price of food, rental of wagons and boats, property
laws, family matters, slave issues, and rights for the poor. But before
him, and acting under strict instructions from the great gods to “bring
well-being to the Sumerians and Akkadians”, was the code of Lipit-
Ishtar, ruler of Isin. But unfortunately only 38 of his laws have been
recovered on tablets. Around 500 years before Hammurabi circa 2350
BC, lived Urnammu who was the ruler of Ur. He was instructed by the
god ‘Nannar’ to lay down a code of law to deal with thieves. They are
described as “grabbers of the citizens’ oxen, sheep and donkeys”. The
laws also included topics dealing with social behaviour. “Orphans shall
not fall prey to the wealthy”; “widows shall not fall prey to the powerful”
and “the man of one shekel shall not fall prey to the man of 60 shekels”.
As if this was not impressive enough, a further 250 years before this and
almost 1,000 years before Hammurabi, there was the EN.SI called
Urukagina who was forced to introduce “necessary” reforms around 2,600
BC. He was instructed by his god ‘Ningirsu’ to “restore the decrees of
former days”. The one question that immediately springs to mind is, that
if these reforms were so necessary, their civilisation must have been
around for quite some time before. Scholars call this find a “precious
record of man's first social reforms based on a sense of freedom, equality
and justice”. I am not sure about that statement because we now know
that there were more sinister forces at play during the emergence of
human civilisation. I feel conflicted about the motives of both Enlil and
Enki in such activities although they certainly both had their respective
motives.CODE OF HAMMURABI CODE OF UR-NAMMU
Enki and Enlil were half-brothers and sons of Anu, the supreme
commander of the planet Nibiru. Enki was the first to arrive on Earth
445,000 years ago in search of gold, and to set up a base before more
Anunnaki would arrive to extract the precious metal. But the two had
completely diverse personalities. Enki was the humanist and creative
scientist, with the heart of a poet, while Enlil was the politician with a
passion for control. He was on a mission to control humanity through
religious violence, fear and oppression, as he was never in favour of
creating this ‘new slave species’ – while Enki was the actual scientist
who planned and created the human species. It is therefore not surprising
that he wanted to uplift humanity in an effort to speed up their evolution.
We learn through the tablets that Enki felt a very close link to his new
creation. Which of the two was instrumental in orchestrating these ‘law
reforms’ is not clear at present. But like all hidden agendas, it will
eventually emerge. My instinct tells me that they both probably had
something to do with the injection of legal principles, but each one had a
slightly different motive. We know what happened in the end, we are the
living proof of all those laws today. And yet some parts of the world had
a completely different approach to the laws that governed their cultures.
This is one possible piece of evidence which highlights how the two rival
Anunnaki brothers tried to control humanity in their own way, each one
taking control of different parts of the world for themselves. It is
beginning to feel as if Enki may have been instrumental in the setup of
the very first secret society which William Bramley calls “The
Brotherhood of the Snake” right after the eviction from ‘Edin’. Afterhaving a run-in with his brother Enlil about the upliftment of ‘Adam and
Eve’, the creator of humanity Enki, realised that the slanderous campaign
against him as the ‘serpent’, the ‘evil snake’, would be fiercely enforced
by Enlil.
Humans would be controlled, whatever it took, and Enlil was an
accomplished strategist and a master of propaganda. Enki had to resort to
a more clandestine approach to uplift Humankind. One such distinct
possibility was the establishment of a small group of humans who were
introduced to more advanced thinking, information and technology. The
start of the so-called ‘secret society’ had arrived. How else can we
possibly explain the incredibly advanced thinkers and philosophers in
ancient times? And small groups of more informed and technologically
astute people? As astounding as the sudden emergence of civilisation was
all those thousands of years ago, the sudden appearance of advanced
thinkers is equally puzzling. Where on Earth did a small group of
individuals with such clear minds suddenly emerge from? Who helped
them to see things so differently? Why were they so much more informed
and enlightened than the rest of the humans who were nervously
worshipping a vengeful god? They must have had a mentor of some
repute. An advisor or guardian who introduced such advanced ideas to
them. William Bramley traces these ‘secret societies’ all the way back to
the Garden of Edin (as the Sumerians called it), but there are however a
few areas where they get very closely entangled with the manipulative
activity of Enlil, who proclaimed himself the only god of man, the god of
the Bible who continued to dispense punishment to his disobedient
subjects and rewarded those who toed the line. These historic
inconsistencies of great violence and yet great benevolence are starting to
take on a whole new slant as we unravel the motives of the two
patriarchal brothers of the Anunnaki, who established the settlement here
on Earth some 445,000 years ago. We will explore much more of their
actual behaviour from the clay tablets known as The Lost Book of Enki
which was meticulously presented by Zecharia Sitchin in 2002.Classic Greek representation of Zeus fighting his brother in a
disagreement.
We will find that this is the identical story to Enlil and Enki during
their argument in the Garden of Eden. Enki was represented as the
serpent and was banished from Eden for attempting to help the first
human couple. Notice the serpent’s tail taking the form of a double
helix DNA. The wings are a constant symbol throughout all
mythologies that talk about the winged serpent, creator god.
But back in the days of Urukagina the ‘law maker’, the bench would
consist of one royal judge who was chosen from 36 men, and three to four
other judges who made up a kind of jury. Meticulous records were kept of
contracts, court proceedings, judgments and sentencing.
One more interesting ritual which was inherited by the Hebrews and
Jews is the ten-day period that marks the beginning of the New Jewish
Year. During this period Jews are supposed to take stock of their activity
from the year gone by and based on their deeds, the fate of the new year
will be determined for them by god. This entire process has been adopted
from the Sumerian culture, where the god Nanshe would come down
every year to evaluate the performance of the humans, not based on
material wealth or conquest, but rather whether they “did the righteous
thing”. Their fate for the year to come would be determined based on the
outcome of such an evaluation by the god Nanshe.
Professors at the University of California at Berkley, claim that theyhave been able to read and play cuneiform notes from a tablet dated to
around 1,800 BC. It seems that in Sumer, music and songs were
performed in temples and many original love songs have been unearthed.
They feature the words while the musical scores are captured in the
margins. We will discover that Inanna, the goddess of love, was the one
who led the artistic explosion. The tablets refer to her constantly as being
highly sexed, enjoying singing and playing instruments, and writing and
reciting poetry. During the excavations at Nippur, which was the religious
centre of Sumer and Akkad at some stage, they found around 30,000
texts, many of which are still being studied. The wealth in cultural finds
continued in Shurupak, where schools dating back to the third millennium
BC were uncovered. From the mound of Tell Brak in northern
Mesopotamia archaeologists uncovered the ancient capital of the
Akkadian empire, the city of Nagar, dating back to 2,000 BC. It is also
the home of one of the oldest religious sites, the Eye Temple. But at Ur,
the birthplace of Abraham, excavation efforts delivered weapons,
chariots, jewellery, helmets made of gold, silver, copper and bronze,
magnificent vases, the remains of a weaving factory, court records and a
towering ziggurat pyramid. More fascinating information in the form of
inscriptions were found at Umma, which referred to “earlier empires” and
at Kish there is another ziggurat pyramid and other monumental
buildings which date back to at least 3,000 BC. The Sumerian city of
Uruk or ‘Erech’, which is situated on the banks of the Euphrates River, is
still considered by many as the first true city in the world. This city
boasts the oldest stone construction known to date, which is a limestone
pavement dating way back into the fourth millennium BC. They also
found a potter’s wheel, a kiln, and exquisite coloured pottery among other
items. Until the 1990s the general consensus was that the earliest cities
arose between 3,500 BC and 3,800 BC, but this time-line is slowly being
pushed back by new digs in Syria, Turkey and Iraq. All this activity in the
ancient Near East is strongly supported by the writings in the Book of
Enki dating back from about 2,050 years BC. This precious prehistoric
account of early humans, outlines the activity of the early settlers on
Earth and their explorations of the whole region and the establishment oftheir own settlements as far back as 445,000 years ago. We can now start
to paint a more complete picture of what was going on in the greater
Mesopotamian area over many thousands of years. In an article from 18
September 2004, New Scientist magazine ran an in-depth feature on the
‘road to civilisation’ in which archaeologist McGuire Gibson from the
University of Chicago makes some startling, and yet expected
discoveries. There have been many hints over the past few decades, that
civilisation must have emerged virtually immediately after the end of the
last Ice Age in the Near East and also in the Mesoamericas, some 9,000
years BC. Now there is real evidence that clearly supports those earlier
theories.
The excavations at Uruk point to settlements already springing up
around 8,000 BC, but it was only around 3,500 BC that it had grown into
a real city which covered about 2.5 square kilometres with a population
of around 50,000. Paul Collins who is an expert on the Ancient Middle
East at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, says that, “There
would have been major buildings, monumental structures on the scale of
the Pantheon,” which would classify it as a city. But to be classified as a
city it also needed to have evidence of ‘zoning’ between administrative
centres, residential areas, markets and so on. It also needed fortification
to demonstrate that it was worthy of defending. Uruk had all these criteria
in abundance by 3,500 BC. But Eridu was the first Sumerian city
according to ancient texts. Many of these claims in scripture were
confirmed when archaeologists uncovered an ancient temple dedicated to
god Enki, ‘Sumer's god of Knowledge’ at the site. It appeared to have
been built and rebuilt many times, but as they dug deeper they struck
virgin soil dating back to 3,800 BC.
Not far from Tell Brak in the north lies Tell Hamoukar, which has been
studied by McGuire Gibson's team for some time. They have also found
evidence of a well-defined city by 3,700 BC, which covered about 12
hectares enclosed by a defensive wall. The many mud-brick ovens found
in the city suggest that there was large scale preparation of food going on
at the site.
It is astounding that every time archaeologists embark on a major digin the greater area of Mesopotamia, they unearth older and more
impressive evidence of organised communal living and a well-evolved
culture and civilisation dating further and further back. New Scientist
points out that David and Joan Oates from the University of Cambridge,
who have been studying the site since 1976, first uncovered second and
third millennium BC artefacts. In 1981, they uncovered hidden under the
foundations of the city wall, deposits from 3,000 BC. It took them
another ten years to come back, but when they did they uncovered
reasonably undisturbed records from the fourth millennium BC and even
earlier, which included the ruins of a large building with very thick walls
and a heavy door dating back to the late fifth millennium BC. It seems to
have been some kind of official administrative building similar to those
visible in the present-day Arab world. Joan Oates is convinced that there
will be digs which will uncover more ‘fully fledged cities’ in the southern
parts that are older than 4000 BC. At the same time Gibson has pointed
out the abundance of pottery and other artefacts scattered all over the
region, which includes the Mediterranean and Arabian peninsula. This
indicates that the “pulse of trading” was strong all over the area. Yet
another site called el-Queili, which is only a few kilometres east of Uruk,
was discovered but it has not been touched since 1980. At the time, the
last bit of excitement to emerge from the site were the remains of what
Joan Oates called “strikingly large houses” dating back to 6,000 BC.
In his book The Goddess and the Bull, Michael Balter writes about the
exciting discoveries further north in Turkey, at the site of Catalhoyuk on
the Anatolian plateau. Since 1958 this site has delivered an astonishing
wealth of prehistoric artefacts. They have uncovered hundreds of
structures, “astounding art”, and much more evidence pointing to the
existence of settled life as far back as 7,000 BC. It is evident that there is
much more hidden below the sands of time all over the area in which the
Anunnaki first touched down. They obviously did not remain exclusively
on the edge of the Persian Gulf at Eridu, but many ancient Sumerian texts
indicate that they set up homes and other settlements further north-west,
right across Asia Minor and into present-day Turkey. Their influence
must have spread through Greece and Macedonia and even further northinto ancient Europe, even as far north as Scandinavia. We can basically
deduce that wherever there were mythological gods, there must have been
the presence of the Anunnaki. As modern archaeologists scratch and dig
they will undoubtedly uncover the evidence necessary to irrefutably
prove the sudden emergence of civilisation virtually immediately after
the last Ice Age some 11,000 to 12,000 years ago.
There is however more physical evidence of even more archaic
cultures and ‘low’ levels of civilisation dating back 77,000 years in
southern Africa. The beads discovered at Blombos in South Africa prove
that humans were involved in the development of ornamental or
decorative pieces a long, long time ago. This does not however mean that
the peak of what would be called ‘civilisation’ had been acquired by them
at that stage. They were mostly nomadic hunter gatherers who left behind
a trail for us to unravel. These very early signs of human presence in
southern Africa go hand in hand with the Cradle of Humankind which is
positioned just north of Johannesburg. It is now accepted by most
scientists that the first humans on Earth lived in this part of the world.
We will read detailed descriptions in the clay tablets, corroborating these
latest theories. How the Anunnaki “created the ‘Adamu’ in their image
and from their essence” to toil in the gold mines of southern Africa, as far
back as 200,000 years ago. Is it a coincidence that the latest scientific
dating of Adam and Eve places them in the same place at the same time?
ANATOLIA AND THE NEAR EASTARTEFACTS WITH EXAMPLES OF THE BALKAN-
DANUBE SCRIPT
Source: www.iatp.md/dava
But while we have been focusing on all this activity in Africa and
Mesopotamia, further north west in the Balkan-Danube region there were
signs of great activity as far back as 9,000 BC. From a small village
called Rast in west Romania emerged a small figurine covered in
“strange geometrical and abstract motifs” which resembled some form of
previously unknown style of writing. But it was only in 1989 that Marija
Gimbutas first observed the markings on the “Madonna” and realized that
these strange “decorative inscriptions” did not follow any set patterns or
repetitive structure with predetermined spatial logic, which suggested
that it must have been some form of early Proto-European writing, dating
back to over 5,000 BC. This shook the scientific world, making it older
than the oldest known Sumerian texts by about 2,000 years. And so was
born the Balkan-Danube Script mystery, now referred to as the oldest
written documents known to man. There was much controversy about thesuggested new written language at first, but now most scholars agree that
the staggering discovery was indeed a Proto-European written language.
The amazing thing is that to date, nobody has been able to decipher it or
venture a guess as to what kind of language it was, or where it originated
from. We do however know quite a lot about the activity of the Proto-
European culture dating back as far as 9,000 BC. Scholars write that
trading activity started on the western side of the Aegean Sea when the
tribes of hunter-gatherers adopted new knowledge from Anatolia and
began to move westwards. Their newfound techniques allowed them to
create beautiful pottery, human figures, copper and other metal artefacts.
Their writing technique and influence spread through the Danube valley,
southern Hungary, Macedonia, Transylvania and northern Greece. It is
important to note that they also built palaces, temples, ships and created
new weaving techniques. Copper forging technology appeared around
5,500 BC which should not surprise us, since we have already seen that at
another place in Anatolia, where these Proto-Europeans apparently
acquired all their knowledge, we found evidence of a well-established
civilisation at some 6,000 BC, who knew how to work with all the metals,
including bronze.
INDUS SCRIPT
Examples of the Indus script
which has not been deciphered to
date.
Some characters have been
identified as symbols for god and
star.
It now makes complete sense that the Sumerians who were forgingmetals 6,000 years BC in Catalhoyuk, which also happens to be in
Anatolia, expanded their knowledge to the Proto-European cultures. It is
also more than probable that the Anunnaki used a different written
language from the Sumerians. Could it be that the indecipherable script
from ancient Europe was actually the written language of the Anunnaki?
It is astonishing that the ancient Indus Valley writings date back to
3,300 BC, only 500 years later than the Sumerian cuneiform texts. Those
Sumerian gods were clearly covering large parts of the world. We know
this from the clay tablets that point out how the Anunnaki gods travelled
the world, setting up different regions of people, under the control of
different gods. The Near Eastern gods refer to travelling to distant lands
in every direction, and the east was obviously one of those places they
disappeared to, while setting up settlements there and searching for gold.
The ancient Indus Civilisation is another example of how archaeologists
keep digging their way deeper back in time. Suddenly, the recent
discoveries which surround the early Harappan/Ravi Phase, pushed back
the estimated date when writing first emerged in the Indus Valley by 700
years. There are many very clear and obvious links between the Indus
gods and the Sumerian gods. Historians agree that there is a definite link
to Anu, Enlil, Enki, Ninhursag and other Anunnaki gods in the Harappan
culture, art, pottery and writings. One such example is the depiction of
the celestial symbol of Anu on an Early Harappan polychrome pot.
HARAPPAN POT WITH A SYMBOL OF A STAR AND A
FISH.
In Harappan culture the symbol of the star not
only means ‘god’, but also ‘anu’ or ‘sky’. The star image was
originally the exclusive symbol for the sky god Anu. It just so happens
that Anu was also the leading divine god of the Sumerian pantheon ofgods. This particular form of the star symbol also represented the
radiant planet Nibiru in Sumerian culture.
The symbol of the fish is one of the most popular motifs of the early
Harappan period. The fish also represented the concept of god and
symbolised the ‘god of waters’. In Sumerian history Enki was often
represented as a fish-like deity and an aquatic god who controlled the
waters.
The symbols of serpents and stars and other instantly recognisable
Sumerian deities are clearly visible in much of the ancient Indus culture.
It is now evident that the major Hindu gods are, in essence, Sumerian
deities with different names. The evidence is visible in the pictorial
tablets, seals and other art depicting gods and deities. The seven divine
goddesses depicted on Indus tablets overseen by a superior god are
suspiciously similar to the seven Anunnaki goddesses, who gave birth to
the first group of ‘primitive workers’ on Earth while being overseen by
Enki or possibly his son Ningishzidda, who according to Sumerian
scriptures was the one who created the genetic pool for the original
humans.
The ancient Indus Valley Civilisation, situated between
modern-day India and Pakistan.But the Indus Civilisation goes back a lot further, which corroborates
the legend that the Vedic poems date back as far as 8,000 BC, surviving
only through oral transfer until they were written down for the first time
some 3,000 years BC. Asko Parpola, a leading figure in ancient Indian
culture, points out that the Indus Civilisation can be traced in an
unbroken chain from a period some 8,000 BC, through the Chalcolithic
5,000-3,600 BC; to the Early Harappan period 3,600-2,600 BC and finally
the Mature Harappan period around 2,550 BC, eventually collapsing after
1,800 BC. There is abundant evidence of close ties to Mesopotamia which
included well-developed trade, maritime trade and close cultural
contacts. The neighbouring cities of Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro were
well developed as early as 3,000 BC. They had similar structures made
from the same bricks; they served as capitals for their provinces and were
part of a unified government that had extreme organisational skills. This
is the kind of influence which would have been imposed by the Sumerian
gods to enable them to exercise control over the humans in that part of
the world. The Harappa people even used Sumerian irrigation techniques
in the lands along the valleys. The Indus Valley has its very own unsolved
ancient secret treasure, known as the ‘Indus Script’. The amazing thing isthat just like the Balkan-Danube Script, there has been very little progress
made in deciphering the Indus Script in over seventy years by the
smartest people available. Is it possible that this may be a derivative of a
similar Anunnaki script used by the Proto-Europeans? After all, the
evidence slaps us in the face, that the Anunnaki were as active in the
Indus Valley as they were in the Proto-European cultures.
EXCAVATIONS AT MOHENJO-DARO
This ruin from around 2500 BC shows the remains of a Harappan
bath pointing to the close cultural similarities between the Greeks,
Romans and Indus Valley civilisations.
We should really not be surprised by this broad influence of the
Sumerian culture and the discovery of ancient undeciphered scripts. Is it
possible that these scripts may have been used by the more advanced
Anunnaki as a form of communication while they explored the world?
The explorers of the 15th century did exactly the same when they moved
into the Americas. They certainly did not land in one place and stay there,
because it ‘looked kind of okay’. They continued to move inland in all
directions and proceeded to explore. It is highly ironic that thousands of
years after Earth was populated by gold-seeking travellers from another
planet, the gene which we inherited from them, surfaced so viciously
when the Spaniards discovered the golden riches of the Americas in the
15th century AD. It therefore stands to reason, that when the Anunnaki
had exhausted the gold deposits in the Near East, they explored the rest of
the planet Earth. They had actually started looking around the planetmuch earlier, long before the gold ran out. They were fortunate to have
the benefit of advanced technology and flight which took them to slightly
more remote territories like Mesoamerica and the Andes. The tablets
refer many times to the ways in which they scanned the seas and the lands
for signs of gold under the surface. The tablets also carry more dramatic
inscriptions of their rising levels of concern about the state of their Planet
Nibiru. The amount of gold that was being produced on Earth was not
enough to deal with their degrading ‘ozone’ problem. We might think this
as very strange or possibly laughable that such an advanced species
would have a problem with their ozone. Well, think again. What is one of
the most pressing environmental concerns on Earth today? Global
warming and the ozone layer. Very simply the ozone protects us against
all the deadly rays which are present in space. The two main culprits are
ultra violet rays and X-rays. Without the ozone we would literally fry like
chips in heated oil. Or like turning on a giant microwave oven in space
pointing at Earth. The point is that if we are experiencing these kind of
problems here, right now, they will be experienced on many other
habitable planets in the galaxy. So before you dismiss this ‘ozone thing’
as a far-fetched hallucination, think again. It is real, it is right here, right
now, on the very planet we call home. How will we deal with the ozone
problem in a 100 years from now when it really starts to destroy crops
and arable land? I don't know … maybe by then we would have found
some amazing new compound on Mars or Europa or Titan or any of the
other celestial bodies within reach in our solar system to produce the
possible saving grace.CIVILISATIONS OF MESOAMERICA
One of the most perplexing events in human history is the sudden
emergence of civilisation in the Americas, which introduced the world to
the Incas, Olmecs, Toltecs and the early Mayas of the Yucatan Peninsula
in Mesoamerica. Historians and archaeologists just cannot agree on the
times and possible dates when these mysterious cultures suddenly
appeared, displaying pretty much all the same behavioural characteristics
of the people in Mesopotamia. Such a sudden appearance of organised
people in a distant continent is just too incredible to describe as a
coincidence. It points irrefutably to an extreme example of the Sumerian-
Anunnaki expansion over the world in search of gold. And gold there was
plenty of in the Americas. This sudden emergence of civilisation in
Mesoamerica happened virtually at the same time as it was exploding in
Mesopotamia, shortly after the end of the last Ice Age. The ancient
secrets of the Mayas and the Incas have kept archaeologists and
historians guessing for many years. How on Earth is it possible that a
virgin civilisation could have emerged out of the blue some ten thousand
miles away from the so-called origin of civilisation in Mesopotamia,
across the Atlantic, 11,000 years ago, unless there was some interference
by the highly mobile Anunnaki? It defies all laws of probability for such
an event to happen randomly on a planet where the only activity was
seemingly restricted to the land between the Persian Gulf and the
Mediterranean. As suddenly as civilisation emerged in the Near East, the
Proto-Mayans appeared in Mesoamerica. They had all the knowledgepossessed by well developed cultures. They knew all about agriculture,
they built cities and pyramids as impressive as the Egyptians and they
even knew how to extract gold from ore. Many theories have arisen about
the origins of the Incas, Mayas, the Toltecs and Olmecs, who collectively
shaped the Andean and Mesoamerican cultures over thousands of years.
EXAMPLE OF A TYPICAL MAYAN PYRAMID
But the Anunnaki had more than just gold on their minds when they
arrived in the Americas. They were also in search of tin. Tin is the
necessary ingredient which together with copper, makes up bronze. At
this time in Earth’s history bronze was becoming the metal of choice.
Indications are that tin supplies in Mesopotamia were running dry and
Inanna or Ishtar makes clear references in her Sumerian texts to “tin
mountains” in Mesoamerica. She was asking permission from the
superior gods to go in search of tin in the new lands. “Let me set out on
the road to the tin ores. Let me learn about their mines.” These tin
mountains have been identified as the areas around Lake Titicaca in
Bolivia. Even today, tin production is continuing in many parts of this
region. The Anunnaki referred to tin as the ‘divine’ metal and called it
‘AN.NA’ which means ‘heavenly stone’. They called the combination of
copper and tin into bronze ‘ZA.BAR’ which means ‘gleaming double
metal’. Ancient references to rich alluvial sources of tin have confused
mineralogists, as pure tin is very rare. But David Forbes, who was a
mineralogist researcher in South America, was astounded when he was
shown a chunk of pure tin actually encasing a rock, as opposed to being
encased in the rock, showing that such deposits must have existed inantiquity, if they still exist today. They did not come from a mine. The
mines and rivers in that area were also rich in gold and other metals. He
was convinced that people who worked those rich river deposits knew
about tin and gold and how to process it from its ore.
ANDEAN CIVILISATION
The fascinating tales of the Andean legends begin with the god
Viracocha who was the ‘creator of man’ and the ‘god of heaven’, who
came to Earth in great antiquity, settling down on the shores of Lake
Titicaca, close to the ancient city of Tiahuanacu, ‘place where the gods
are born’. Inca tales and legends also talk about the capital city Cuzco as
being established by the ‘children of the sun’ who were created and
instructed by the great god Viracocha when he first settled at lake
Titicaca. There are many versions of the settlement of the first people.
One such tale comes from Juan de Betanzos, who writes that Viracocha
created the world in two phases. Many of these ancient fables carry the
same storyline as the Bible and the Sumerian scripts, which talk about the
flood as a dividing event. An ancient Quechua tale says that the creator
god “on the first occasion, made the heavens and the Earth” then he
created mankind. But “this people did some sort of wrong to Viracocha
and he was angered by it”. It continues that “those first people and their
chief he converted into stones in punishment”, then after some time ofdarkness “he made men and women out of stones”. Then he apparently
gave them all tasks and abilities and told them where they should go and
stay. It has many similarities with the Biblical flood story, before and
after the flood. Noah was also told to ‘go forth and multiply’. There are
other stories about the original Andean or Mayan or Inca forefather called
Manco Capac, who was created by god. He was the first to be made a king
by god and was the first monarch. Some say that he arrived by boat from
another place across the sea, while others talk of god giving him a golden
wand called ‘Tupac-yauri’ which means ‘splendorous sceptre’. With this
golden wand he had to go in search of a destined land and was said to
have started the Inca capital city of Cuzco. He was the first Inca, after
whom they were all called the ‘children of the sun’.
The Popol Vuh is called ‘the sacred book’ by the Quiche Mayas. It is
their most revered book and one that has survived for centuries, written in
Roman script shortly after the Spanish invasion in the 16thcentury. This is
a copy of the original which has been lost to antiquity, but it contains
come fascinating stories. It mentions that “the first people created by god
were imperfect” which correlates exactly with the detailed description of
the many attempts by Enki, Ninhursag and Ningishzidda, to create the
first ‘primitive worker’.
Many people throughout the ages have made pronouncements and told
tales about the ancient civilisations of the Americas. The origins of these
Proto-Americans have also been linked to the highly controversial
existence of the island of Atlantis or Poseidia. Plato was already referring
to such people from Atlantis in 350 BC, when he wrote about the
Mesopotamians and Proto-Europeans being attacked by the ‘islanders’.
He wrote that some 9,000 years had passed since the war between “those
on the outside” and “those on the inside” of the “Pillars of Hercules”. The
‘pillars’ refer to Gibraltar which divided the Atlantic ocean and the
Mediterranean. This would place the time at around 9,500 BC, just after
the last Ice Age. This Ice Age date plays a pivotal role in all of pre-
history, as it crops up over and over again as a landmark for the
beginning of most activities by modern humans, whether they were inMesopotamia or the Americas. The end of the last Ice Age brought the
sudden emergence of civilised man in a number of places around the
world and is regarded by many as the first ‘flood’ that swept the Earth,
causing Humankind to have to start from scratch. We should therefore
not be surprised when many scholars claim that the first people arrived in
the Americas from the lost island of Atlantis at the time when the last Ice
Age ended. It would make perfect sense since their island was about to be
swallowed by the giant tidal waves which caused the great flood of that
time. In December 2004, we saw how devastating a relatively small
Tsunami can be to islands in its way. Imagine what a flood ten to twenty
times that size would do. This is why the original people settled on the
mountainous shores of the lake Titicaca, far away from the flood waters
and close to rich sediments of gold, tin and other metals. This was also
the time during which agriculture and farming were introduced to man, as
outlined in many Sumerian tablets, especially the Lost Book of Enki,
which describes in great detail the times and activities and relationships
between the Anunnaki gods and the newly created humans.
There is clear evidence of crops being cultivated in the Teohuacan
Valley some 7,000 years BC, but there is also evidence that there was
probably some devastating flood leading up to this date, which only
allowed civilisation to continue much later in about 3,100 BC. Barry Fell,
a professor at Harvard, successfully proved that the Americas were being
visited as early as 5,000 BC by Proto-Europeans and Africans. Roman
vases have been found on the seabed near Brazil; Roman coins were
found off the beach in Massachusetts; Carthaginian vases were found off
the coast of Honduras, but the permission to investigate the wreck was
denied, in order to protect the historic importance of Columbus. Professor
Fell also speaks about many sites in the Americas which have been found
containing Carthaginian and Celtic writings. Many Punic inscriptions
have been found on gravestones, cairns and in stone cellars, dating back
to the Bronze Age between 1,200 and 3,000 BC. There are also
inscriptions in the original Celt written language of Ogham from the pre-
Roman times of France and Spain. On a stone carving of a ship from
Tarshish, there is an inscription that says: “Voyagers from Tarshish, thisstone proclaims.” This was translated from the Tartessian Punic
language. The Southern American pre-history can really be divided into
two regions where the Anunnaki gods were active. Mesoamerica which
includes Mexico, and South America – mainly Peru and Bolivia, where
according to the Incas it all began. The Mayans of the Yucatan Peninsula
in Mexico had the gold, while the Incas and their ancestors had the tin.
One of the most incredible ancient finds in all of archaeological history
was the Mayan calendar. When it was first discovered it perplexed all
who tried to figure it out. But it took the persistent investigative work of
a German librarian by the name of Ernst Forstemann in 1880, to break the
code and unravel its incredible mystery. When the Mayan calendar was
finally explained, it showed the incredible knowledge that they possessed
of the cosmos, solar system and the movements of planets, including our
own moon. The Mayan calendar became known as the ‘Long Count’.
Instead of using irrelevant points of reference to historic figures by which
to develop a calendar, they used the movements of the Sun, moon and
Venus to calculate precise points in time, to the ‘first’ rising or ‘birth’ of
Venus. All the Mesoamerican cultures believe that there are five different
‘ages’ or ‘Suns’. After many years of deciphering the Mayan
mathematical formulas, scholars agree that the beginning of the Long
Count started on the 13th August 3,114 BC and will end on 22 December
2,012. That means that the period is 5,126 years long. What the exact
significance of the length of the ‘age’ or the end date is, is not clear. But
it's not a long time to go, so let's just wait and see. Some scientists claim
that it has to do with a shift in the Earth's magnetic field, when the north
and south poles move away from their current positions and establish new
magnetic poles.
GIANT OLMEC STONE HEADSErik Parker stands in front of a giant Olmec head. Just one example
of several such works of art discovered in the jungles of Mexico.
Notice the distinct African features and protective head gear on both
heads. This has baffled historians for ages.
The mystery of the Mesoamerican civilisations continues with the
Olmecs. They appeared in the Tabasco area of Mexico as suddenly as all
the others. But their distinctly ‘African’ physical features were
completely different from the other locals. They seem to have appeared
around the beginning of the Mayan Long Count some 3,114 years BC.
The colossal stone head found at Veracruz in 1862 shows convincingly
that their features were distinctly African. Several other giant heads have
been found and all of them show the same African features. On other
carvings they were almost always depicted with some kind of tool in their
hands, digging for gold. In many of the depictions on rocks and seals and
stelae, their tools are reasonably detailed and it becomes clear that these
were sophisticated people with a good knowledge of ore mining.
Let us analyse the situation for a second. If you had discovered gold in
a faraway land and needed experienced miners to deal with the perils of
getting it out of the ground, would you attempt to train the inexperienced
people from the surrounding districts, or would you rather bring in a team
of well-trained miners who could get on with the task immediately, while
sharing their skills with the locals? Many scholars believe that is exactly
what the ancient ‘mining lords’ did. The Anunnaki gods came to America
to mine for gold and brought their experienced miners from Africa. Itprovides a very simplistic explanation for the appearance of the Olmecs
or ‘rubber people’ in Mesoamerica. It also explains why there was so
much gold when the Spaniards first invaded it some 4,500 years later.
To truly understand the magnificent golden riches that greeted the
invaders, we just need to mention the Peruvian city of Cuzco. There the
Conquistadores found the great ‘Temple of the Sun’ which had walls
covered with gold. There were chapels and burial chambers honouring
ancestors, filled with a variety of statuettes and images. It boasted an
artificial garden where all the plants, shrubs and trees were made of gold.
In the courtyard, there was a mock field of maize where every stalk was
made of silver and the delicate ears made of gold, which covered around
20,000 square metres or two hectares. The Spaniards soon realised that
they would have to fight for the gold as all these American cultures
believed that gold was a gift from the gods and it belonged to the gods.
So it is our deduction that the Olmecs were a group of miners from Africa
who were brought to America to mine for gold by their Anunnaki-
Sumerian masters. And at this point, in our highly informed civilisation
of the 21st century, there seems to be no better explanation. After all the
Anunnaki have come to this new land to get more gold and they needed
experienced miners. Who better to bring along for the task than the
African miners of gold who had been created by the Anunnaki for that
specific task, and who had loads of experience by then? Many of the
depictions of Olmec miners show some form of advanced fire tool, which
they point at the rock face. It almost seems like a device that produced a
flame or beam to heat or cut the rock. They even show these miners with
a kind of headgear that produced beams of light. Too much to swallow?
Well, these stone carvings and depictions have survived for over 5,000
years, and even today we still mine for gold, using hand held tools and
lamps on the helmets even at our advanced levels of sophistication. So
why could they have not done so? It may just be that the Olmecs had a
smarter way of doing it. They must have known a great deal about
engineering and construction because their pyramids and other lost cities
are as impressive as any of the Mayan or Egyptian structures. They areremembered for building what is possibly the oldest pyramid in the
Americas and introducing the ‘dot and bar’ counting system which was
apparently used by the Mayas to develop their ‘Long Count’ calendar in
later years. They also cultivated maize and other crops and introduced a
ball game with a rubber ball, which may just be the predecessor to
basketball and soccer. They were known as the ‘rubber people’, the
meaning of the word Olmec. The latter Spanish mining engineers have
often spoken of “prehistoric gold mines” at Mexican sites.
If you have doubts about the African connection to the Olmecs, here is
a curious bit of information. The Olmec style of writing is very similar to
the writing used by the Vai people of West Africa. They also spoke a
language that had a strong resemblance to that of the Manding (Malinke-
Bambara) language spoken in West Africa. Is that just another
coincidence? It is believed that the Olmec people introduced writing to
the New World and they had both a syllabic and hieroglyphic script. The
decipherment of the Olmec writing of ancient Mexico provides us with
keen insight into the world of the Olmec. Rafinesque published an
important paper on Mayan writing in 1832, that helped to decipher the
Olmec's writing.
The great Olmec centres that developed at La Venta, San
Lorenzo and Laguna de los Cerros, and the smaller centres such as Tres
Zapotes, were not simply vacant religious sites, but dynamic settlements
which included artisans and farmers, as well as priests and the rulers.
Then there were the Toltecs, Aztecs, Zapotecs, Mixtecs, and other groups
who lived and influenced the ancient cultures of the Americas over many
thousands of years. Each one pointing to the other whence they received
their knowledge about gold mining and other skills. The most amazingthing is that all these ancient American cultures had one thing in common
– they all worshiped the same deity who was known as the ‘Winged
Serpent’ or ‘Flying Serpent’.
He went by different names. This major god was called Kukulkan by
the Mayas, Quetzalcoatl by the Aztecs, Viracocha by the Incas, Gucumatz
in central America, Votan in Palenque and Zamna in Izamal.
The pre-Columbian Inca Civilisation was extraordinary in its
development of human society and culture, ranking with the early
civilisations of Egypt and Mesopotamia. There are several myths about
pre-Inca civilisations and as with all ancient civilisations, legends and
ancient stone carvings and their monuments speak of creation by gods
who came from the skies, yet no one is certain how any of these
civilisations came into being. Many just seem to spring up as if out of
nowhere.
So were these gods actually real? Did they really come from the sky to
create man in all these different parts of the world? Once again, the
similarity to Mesopotamian and biblical legends are too close to be
coincidental, especially if we take into account the vast distances between
the continents with the Atlantic Ocean in between. There is a pre-Incan
legend that speaks of Viracocha who is depicted in many forms, which is
not unlike gods in other civilisations. He was known as the ‘good god’,
but the warrior side to his personality was also often shown. We see him
as the enlightened god in white robes who brings knowledge, and the
warrior god with staves in his hands and a sun symbol around his head,
not unlike that of the sun god Ra in ancient Egypt. Viracocha, as the
feathered serpent god, is one of the great mysteries of ancient American
cultures. But there is a clear link to the activities of the Anunnaki in this
part of the world and Viracocha is the main protagonist leading the rest of
the gods who came in search of gold. The only question is, which of the
feathered serpents is he? Enki the ‘Lord of the Earth’, who is always
depicted as a winged serpent, or his son Ningishzidda, whose symbol is
also the entwined serpent, representing his knowledge of medicine.
Quetzalcoatl was the good god and hero of the Nahuatl people. He was
the ‘Feathered Serpent’, hero god, giver of all their knowledge. The storygoes that he established the city of Tula around 3,200 BC, taught the
people about maize farming and gave them other important knowledge.
He was fair-skinned. But his brother was jealous and cast him out.
Quetzalcoatl promised that he would return to “establish rule of law and
enlightenment”. It is this kind of character description which closely
resembles Enki or his son Ningishzidda. As we explained, both had
serpents in their Sumerian depictions.
But there are many other fascinating tales about the relationship
between the gods, the people and their obsession with gold in the
Americas. We already outlined the golden riches that greeted Cortes, the
Spanish explorer, when he first set foot in this part of the world. He was
astounded by the amount of gold there was. The cities were covered with
it. The thing that amazed him, was that all the locals explained to Cortes
how they smelted the metal in small pots and cast them in bars. They also
explained that “once it was ready it was sent to the capital, returned to the
gods to whom the gold had always belonged.” This seems to be a constant
mantra with the ancient American cultures. They all claimed that the gold
belonged to the gods. To the Aztecs, gold was a ‘divine metal’. The
Toltecs in Mexico were mining it 1,000 years BC already and the Incas
believed that it was “the gods who caused gold to be so valued”. They
also believed that gold was made from the gods' tears. Sitchin compares
this notion to the voice of god as it spoke through the prophet Haggai.
“The silver is mine and the gold is mine. So sayeth the Lord of Hosts.”
Once again the similarity is a little too close for coincidence. The Mayans
called gold ‘teocuitlatl’ which meant ‘the gods’ excretion’– his tears and
his perspiration. But the serpent connection has another twist which links
it to the Near East and our Anunnaki gods.
There is a very good reason why the symbol of a snake is so prominent
in Earth history. Once again it is revealed to us by the Sumerian tablets.
After Alalu first landed on Earth, he went in search of water north-west of
where Eridu was later built, and at the shores of a lake or a river, he saw a
snake for the very first time. It is obvious from his reaction that snakes
were not known on Nibiru. “A hissing sound he could hear; a slithering
body by the poolside was moving.” After killing the snake in a reflexaction he examined it with amazement. “The slithered body lay still…
like a rope its long body was, without hands or feet was the body…”.
Alalu pondered this creature for some time, wondering if it was the
guardian of the water or what purpose it might have served. Later, when
Enki and his first team of exploring astronauts landed to join him, he
showed them the serpents. It makes good sense that they would have used
this creature as some kind of symbol on their new planet, since it was the
first creature they saw. The Mayan word for serpent is ‘can’ which is
parallel to the Hebrew word Canaan, and that is why the god from Canaan
got the title of ‘serpent’.
After Quetzalcoatl settled in the Americas, he established his first city
inland at the great river Nachan, which means ‘place of serpents’. It
stands to reason that there would be snakes of a wide variety present in
that part of the world, but it is also very close to the Hebrew word for
serpent ‘Nachash’. Arthur Posnansky found a series of inscriptions on
rocks on the shores of Lake Titicaca that links the ancient Peruvian script
to inscriptions found on Easter Island. For those who don't know Easter
Island, it is an extremely remote island in the middle of the Pacific
between Australia and South America, which sports a long line of giant
‘heads’ carved out of rock. As incredible as it is, both these scripts, which
originate a great distance from each other, Titicaca and Easter Island
respectively, are related to the Indus Valley script and the writing of the
Hittites of Mesopotamia. From a series of archaeo-astronomic
calculations, Prof. Rolf Muller concluded that the structures at Machu
Picchu, Cuzco and Tiahuanacu are at least 4,000 years old, which would
explain how the Indus and Mesopotamian texts could have influenced
their sister cultures on the other side of the world. But how would they
have arrived there? With the help of the ever-present Anunnaki gods of
course.
In the biblical story of Cain and Abel we are told that the two brothers
were given separate tasks to help provide for the growing family of man.
As with all of biblical stories, we find tales of exact parallel in Sumerian
scriptures that predate the Bible by at least 1,000 years. In this case, the
story is told in great detail, describing the brothers Ka-in “He who in theField Food Grows” and Abael “He of the Watered Meadows”, as they go
about their respective chores of planting crops and breeding domestic
animals. Just like the Bible says. When Abael's animals started to eat
Kain's crops, a fierce fight erupted between the brothers during which Ka-
in killed Abael. Although he was filled with remorse and realised his
grave mistake, the Sumerian gods decreed that he should be banished
away from their land of Edin to toil on his own, without the help of the
Anunnaki gods. Marduk was the firstborn son of Enki who arrived on
Earth to be with his father on this exciting adventure, exploring a new
planet. Marduk had the following to say: “…let Ka-in's life be spared, to
the ends of the Earth let him be banished!” Enki agreed with him.
“Eastward to a land of wandering for his evil deed Ka-in must depart…”
Enki concluded. And so it was that Ka-in disappeared to a distant land.
We can speculate where it may have been, but a further clue is provided
later, when it is revealed that it was a land of high mountains, steep
valleys and a great lake high in the mountains. There could be a number
of places like that in Europe, which could be linked to the early Proto-
European farming activity. But this event took place way before the
flood, which would eliminate ancient Europe as a possible candidate
territory for Ka-in’s place of settlement. Large parts of Europe would
have had snow and ice and would not have been very pleasant to farm in.
The southern hemisphere is a much more likely candidate to fit the
geographical description.
Another crucial clue is given to us by Ningishzidda who was another
son of Enki, involved in the ‘genetic creation’ of ‘the Adamu’. This
bright young scientist was a master at genetic engineering and he
certainly got lots of experience on Earth in the early days according to the
Book of Enki, which was compiled and translated by Zecharia Sitchin. In
this incredible book we learn virtually everything we wanted to know
about the origin of humanity and the activities that brought us to the days
of Abraham. Ningishzidda explains how he genetically created Ka-in not
to be able to grow a beard. “By Ningishzidda was the life essence of Ka-
in altered. That his face a beard should not grow, Ka-in's life essence
Ningishzidda changed.” It is well established that the native people of theAmericas do not really grow beards, because of a subtle genetic
differentiation from the Europeans. This is a vivid clue pointing to the
strong probability that Ka-in eventually ended up in the mountainous
lands of the early Inca civilisation, in Peru, near Lake Titicaca. The Incas
refer to ancient times when their progenitors arrived from a distant land
in the west. Is it possible that it was Ka-in, after whom they were named?
In-ca = Ca-in?
The world is filled with incredible mysteries from distant prehistoric
times when man was supposed to be a wandering nomad, living in caves
and struggling to survive. Then suddenly after the Great Flood of around
11,000 BC, he emerged from the caves with instant knowledge of many
things, praying to a number of ever-present gods who seemed to be active
all over the world. There are hundreds more examples of other
civilisations in Africa, Asia, Japan, Australia and other islands scattered
around the world, which also miraculously received great knowledge
from some mysterious place sometime shortly after the Great Flood.
What we need to establish is the realistic probability that all this
knowledge just suddenly came to primitive humans without some sort of
assistance from a more advanced power. The ancient scripts of the
Sumerians provide us with thousands of snippets of ‘tough-to-argue-
against’ evidence that such intervention actually occurred. All we have to
do is remove it from the realms of ‘mythology’ where it has been
positioned by ignorant historians, and accept that those were times that
we cannot possibly comprehend today. We can hardly understand how a
man like Hitler could marshal up so much support to take on the whole
world in our own lifetime and exterminate millions of people. If it was
not for the visual evidence, and if we had to rely on oral tales of the
events from only 65 years ago, we would find it hard to believe. Mind
you, there are people who still do not want to believe the whole Second
World War saga with its extermination of the Jews, even in the face of all
the evidence we have. It is therefore not surprising that we find it
difficult to accept written evidence from thousands of years ago, which
meticulously outlines the steps of Humankind on Earth.
One of the most compelling examples of interaction between gods andhumans is the story of Egypt. Archaeologists, historians and other
scholars have speculated for the past 200 years as to the origins of the
great knowledge of the Egyptians. The truth is that their entire culture
stems directly from the Sumerians with all their major gods, and they
inherited virtually everything from the Sumerians, except their writing.
We learn from the tablets that the Anunnaki divided the world into a
number of regions and appointed various family members to take care of
their own regions, with explicit instructions to teach the ‘earthlings’ the
art of civilisation. In a strange twist of fate they needed the earthling's
help after the flood, to make the Earth habitable again. Anu instructed
them to “rebuild the cities where they stood before” the flood. They were
to appoint kings and priests to each city through which they would
communicate their instructions to the people. They taught them to make
bricks, to build extravagant buildings, how to calculate, introduced
wheeled chariots, laid down laws and a judicial system and much more.
Nowhere was the interaction between gods and kings as pronounced as
in ancient Egypt. The firstborn son of Enki was Marduk. He was
appointed as the god of Egypt, where he was worshipped as ‘Ra - The
Bright One’ and later ‘Amun -The Invisible or Absent’ god. Enki was
known as ‘Ptah -The Developer’ and Ningishzidda was worshipped as
‘Tehuti -The Divine Measurer’. But Marduk was rebellious from the
word go and started to introduce a whole new way of doing things. He
introduced a count of 10 instead of 60, he divided the year into 12
months, and had temples built everywhere in his honour. He orchestrated
the building of a great temple for Anu and Enki, and he was instrumental
in dictating the Book of the Dead to instruct Pharaohs and Kings on what
to do if they wanted to be taken up to ‘heaven’ by him after death. It
explained how to reach the ‘Duat’ or ‘Place of Celestial Boats’. Although
Marduk proclaimed his supremacy over all other gods, causing much
unhappiness among the other Anunnaki, he was not endowed with
knowledge of eternal life by his father Enki. “Then all manner of
knowledge, except that of dead reviving to Ra he gave” - is said about
Enki in the tablets. But Marduk (Ra) constantly made those claims to the
Pharaohs and priests of Egypt, laying down a strict set of rules and ritualsthey had to perform to reach the eternal afterlife in the heavens. What he
was referring to was life on planet Nibiru. Another compelling entry by
Marduk in The Book of Enki, which outlines his deception of the Pharaohs
was: “Let the kings of my region of Neteru offspring be, to Nibiru in an
afterlife journey.” Neteru was the name used for the Anunnaki observers
who were supposed to keep an eye on the region. Marduk/Ra decreed that
the kings appointed to rule over Egypt had to be offspring from Anunnaki
and Earthlings, to make them superior to mere Earthlings. Once again
this explains why so many of the Pharaohs believed that they were
actually gods themselves. But it was that kind of relationship between
gods and mortals, and the power of ‘eternal life’ being usurped by
Marduk, and his encouragement of the kings to obey him and follow him
into the afterlife, which led to the many murals in Egyptian tombs
depicting dramatic scenes of their journey to the land of eternal life.
These depictions have amazed historians for centuries while searching for
the real meaning behind them. Travelling in a ‘Boat of Heaven’ across
the skies to eternal life and immortality. Over and over, historians have
tried to explain these images as dramatised depictions of the Egyptian
religion. But it was much more real than that. It now becomes very clear
where the Egyptians got those ideas from. It was a cunning manipulative
Anunnaki god, who was promised the command of the planet, now
demanding his rightful place on the ladder of importance among the gods
from Nibiru.
PYRAMIDS OF GIZA
From left to right: Menkaure, Khafre and Khufu or Great Pyramid.Notice the two smaller queen’s pyramids in the foreground. The
Great Pyramid is the only one remaining wonder of the ancient Seven
Wonders of the World.
The pyramids of Giza have perplexed historians and archaeologists
alike, making all kinds of pronouncements about the origins of the
pyramids. The popular opinion is that the great pyramid was built by
King Khufu (Cheops) of the 4thDynasty, during his reign some 2,589
years BC. This has been contradicted by many scholars over the years,
who claim that Khufu was merely a ‘user’ of the pyramid, that the
pyramids of Giza already existed by the time he took the throne. Any
inscriptions that may have been found in or on the pyramid were made
long after it was completed. There are so many inconsistencies in the
story of the building of the pyramids by the Pharaohs, that it keeps
attracting new theories. If the pyramids of Giza were built by Khufu,
Khafre and Menkaure, as is claimed by historians, the progression seems
back to front. Would it not make more sense that the latter kings would
have wanted to show their supremacy? In that case the first pyramid
would have been the smallest, followed by the larger one, eventually
ending with biggest one, the Great Pyramid. This is a simple principle of
progression that the Egyptians understood much better than we do today.
There are many arguments raised by writers, like Graham Hancock in his
book Fingerprints of the Gods, that go a long way to establishing that the
pyramids were built long before the Egyptian Civilisation came into
existence. They certainly were not built to be tombs for kings. It seems to
follow that the early Egyptians would have been highly impressed by
these giant monuments of their gods, and they tried to imitate them. The
later pyramids became great tributes to their gods of which they were
very proud, but the results were not always that successful. It is clear that
all the imitation pyramids built by the Egyptian Pharaohs, were much
smaller, did not possess the complex passages of the Great Pyramid, and
often collapsed. They obviously did not have the knowledge of the
Anunnaki who were the original builders of the Giza pyramids. The latter
kings could never match the size and the angles of the original structure.Once again, the Sumerian texts give us a very different version of the
pyramids' origins, and again these seem to make much more practical
sense than any of the more popularised ‘fairytale’ versions. It was the
talented Ningishzidda who the Egyptians worshipped as ‘The Divine
Measurer’ who planned, measured, modelled, and perfectly built the three
pyramids of Giza. His reason was far more pressing than a giant tomb to
be buried in. The Book of Enki describes it very vividly. But before he
built the final thing, he first made a smaller scale prototype.
“The rising angles of four smooth sides with this he perfected. Next
to it a larger peak he placed, its sides to Earth's four corners he set;
By the Anunnaki, with their tools of power, were its stones cut and
erected. Beside it, in a precise location, the peak that was its twin he
placed; With galleries and chambers for pulsating crystals he
designed it.”
They called the erections “Ekur – House Which Like a Mountain Is”.
What becomes quite clear from this short extract, is that the pyramids
had a far more important role to play in the lives of the Anunnaki. The
flood had wiped out their space port, landing places, measurements,
beacons and other support structures that they had developed for regular
take-off and landing with their space craft. The two pyramids were new
indestructible beacons with specific chambers for “pulsating crystals” to
help point out the landing places when approaching from space. They
would not allow another flood to upset their base on Earth. The pharaohs
who followed took inspiration from these great structures and started to
imitate them with less success. Engineers have pointed out that there are
very definite differences in the knowledge that went into building the
Great Pyramids, and the many other smaller imitations that followed.
Clearly, the kings and pharaohs did not possess the knowledge of the
more evolved Ningishzidda. The pyramids also proved the supremacy of
the gods to the Egyptians, who worshipped them fanatically.
So far we have learnt that ancient civilisations sprang up all over the
world shortly after the Great Flood of around 11,000 BC. They all showed
remarkable knowledge and understanding virtually overnight, whichcould only have happened if there was some form of intervention from
the Anunnaki gods who ruled the world and explored every corner in
search of gold. The ‘primitive worker’ was serving his purpose well, but
now the humans who survived the flood had a more crucial function to
perform than just to dig for gold. They had to provide for the growing
population on a planet where much of the arable land was destroyed. The
‘slave species’ had been promoted to ‘provider’, and for the first time the
Anunnaki conceded that they were dependent on their slaves. In these
dramatic translations we stumble upon the only two common
denominators that can be traced all the way to the birth of Humankind.
Our obsession with gold and slavery.