CHAPTER 11
Wrath of god
I was watching a documentary on Alexander the Great, when I started
wondering why he was so admired by his followers, and what made him
so ‘Great’. Is it the number of empires and kingships he overthrew, or the
number of cities which fell under his sieges, or the number of people who
supported him in his quest to invade the whole world? Is it possible that
he was more feared than admired? It seems that he is even more admired
today by historians and the general populace than he was in 333 BC. He is
referred to in encyclopaedias as the conqueror of the Persian Empire and
probably the world's greatest military leader of all time. He has inspired
many novels and movies which have used him as a role model for the
personification of a man's man, strong and steadfast, determined,
reaching for the impossible and succeeding in the face of insurmountable
odds. Basically, he personifies the kind of story book hero that does not
exist on Earth today. A deep thinker, strategist and great leader of men. In
a short space of twelve years, Alexander conquered virtually all of the
known world as he marched his army of 40,000 men from west to east;
invading cities and villages one by one, often killing all the men, women
and children, or saving the women and children but selling them into
slavery. He plundered the wealth of the cities, royal treasuries and took
all their booty. After overpowering the cities, he often burnt them to the
ground.
Those who obeyed him were rewarded with unspoken treasures, while
those who resisted him were brutally murdered. Prisoners of war were
either released or murdered, all depending on his mood on that particular
day. The global population at this time was estimated to be around 100
million and much of this eventually fell under the rule of Alexander the
Great. This great leader of men was also known to have killed his fatherPhilip II, a number of members of his army who disagreed with his
judgment and even his close friend and confidant whose advice conflicted
with that of the great Alexander. This man went so far as to declare
himself a ‘god’, believing that he was above mere mortals and the son of
the great Zeus, god of gods.
Where does this potential for violence, oppression and punishment
come from? Are we merely imitating something or someone from days
gone by? Someone who was instrumental in controlling the formative
years after our creation? If you look at the history of Humankind all the
way back to the days of Adam, Cain and Abel, it is one long horrific tale
of betrayal, murder, warfare, oppression, rape and pillage, jealousy, envy,
greed and continuous unspeakable horror inflicted by man on his fellow
man. But the passage of time has a strange way of smoothing out the
terrible truths of the past. Time has the ability to somehow legitimise the
horrors committed in days gone by. History books have a tendency to
glorify some of the acts of past leaders, when in reality they should be
condemned by latter generations. Alexander was just one such ‘great’
warring hero of the distant past. There were many others and most of
them are revered as great historical leaders, forever imprinted in our
memories. In truth, they were just insatiable, power-hungry thugs who
used their influence and wealth to accumulate more and more.
Attila the Hun is another great leader of the past who is described
somewhat differently by historians. Why is that? Because he did not have
an empire before he started to invade and rule other kingdoms? Because
his tribe was described as nomadic? He was just doing what all the other
kings were doing, expanding his territory by force. This is how a historian
by the name of Rit Nosotro writes about Attila.
“Attila the Hun has been known as a ruthless barbarian, fierce and
uncivilised. The devastation that he delivered to his enemies and the
terror that he instilled in them during his lifetime caused him to become
known as ‘The Scourge of God’. While most people see Attila as being
just a ferocious warrior, the more obscure side of him shows us that he
was also a great king, possessing great leadership abilities and
management skills. Attila the Hun was born in approximately 406 AD tothe ruling Hun family, his uncle being the king. Although we do not know
much about Attila's childhood other than that he was taught to ride a
horse, shoot a bow, and fight in hand-to-hand combat at a very young age.
By his late teens, he was leading the Huns in merciless battle against their
enemies, the Visigoths. He pillaged numerous towns causing utter
devastation. No one could match him in battle, and by his thirties, he was
the Huns' leading commander.
Before Attila's time, the Huns were a nomadic, barbarian race. They
came from Asia and first reached the outskirts of the Roman Empire in
the late 4th century. The Huns conquered the barbarian Ostrogoths and
drove back the Visigoths. The Eastern Roman Empire was threatened by
these vicious Huns until 418 when Rome and the Huns negotiated peace
terms. To secure peace, important persons, such as the young Attila, were
exchanged as hostages between the Romans and the Huns. During Attila's
two years in Rome, he was awed by the grandeur of the Empire. Upon his
return home, he vowed to someday go back to Rome not as a hostage, but
as a conqueror.”
Why is Attila seen as a ruthless barbarian, while Alexander was
‘great’, and the Romans were imperial and ‘civilised’? It almost feels as
if we are legitimising their individual rights to conquer others, based on
their socio-economic status. Because Alexander was the king of a wealthy
empire he was allowed to invade and destroy. But because Attila was the
leader of a lowly group of bandits, he should not possess such privileges.
So what makes us in the 21stcentury so captivated by these warring heroes
of the past? Do we not have heroes like this in the modern world? Or how
long do we have to wait for some of the more recent potential candidates
for ‘great military leader’ status, to be so recognised and decorated?
Alexander conquered the world in the name of Macedonia, while Julius
Caesar conquered the world some 300 years later in the name of the
Roman Empire. The war stories go on. But still they are ‘great’ leaders of
the past. Just recently we had a great military leader who tried to conquer
the world and in the process got very close to doing so. He had the full
fanatical support of his people just like Alexander did; his followers allbelieved that they should conquer the world; he was admired by them as a
great leader of men; a great strategist and someone they would follow to
the end of the world in battle. He mobilised his well-trained and well-
equipped army, killing many in the name of his empire, he wiped out
cities and villages as part of his expansion plan, he occupied new lands
and countries, declaring them part of the new empire. He looted wealth
and riches as part of his victories and depending on his mood, he would
eliminate anyone who stood in his way, even his close friends and allies.
The kind of man which history books often praise as a ‘great leader of
men’.
But this great leader was Adolf Hitler, and our history books have not
been as kind to him as they have been to Alexander and to the Romans.
So what is the difference between Adolf Hitler, Alexander, Atilla the Hun
and Julius Caesar? How much time will need to pass before historians
start to include Hitler in the same revered group of great military leaders
of the past? Or is it the visual reminder of the horrors of war that will
exclude Hitler from this ‘great’ group of leaders? It certainly feels that
time does soften the blow while the more recent dictators were captured
on film which blows the romantic perception of war in an instant.
In other chapters we have explored the DNA, our genome, and its
capacity to control all of our emotional and physical characteristics. We
raise the argument that we are the slaves to our DNA. And as we cast our
critical mind back to the events which shaped our history, all we can see
is violence, conflict and destruction. It's as if Humankind simply cannot
escape the grip of its violent behaviour. Once again, I must remind you
that the violent gene runs ‘deep and strong’ in our bodies and we must
begin to identify this behavioural pattern of humanity, so that we can
begin to understand it. Mumbo-jumbo psychology will get us nowhere.
The harsh reality is embedded in our genome. Our propensity for cruelty
and violence was unconsciously bred into us by our maker at the point of
creation. And because we were made in the ‘image of our maker’, it must
surely mean that we inherited more than just his physical features. There
is the distinct possibility that if we were created as genetic experiments,
or as I have called us, a ‘slave species’, other genetic characteristics liketemperament and even our potential for violence would have been
transferred to us. From genetic studies we have already found that most
of our genome is somehow switched off. This could mean that the
‘maker’ created a potential genetic imbalance, by purposely disabling
certain genes, and allowing others to remain as the master programme
which controls us. So, by extrapolation, if we have parts of our maker in
us, surely this must mean that such a ‘maker’ must have the violent gene
embedded in its genome? Is this why there are so many horrific tales of
brutality by ‘god’ towards man throughout ancient history? Could this
god have been a mere advanced being, merely exhibiting his neo-human
traits of jealousy, vengeance, retribution, punishment and other very
normal characteristics typical of the human species? Is it at all possible
that God with a big ‘G’ could behave in such a barbaric human way?
The wrath of god should really be called the wrath of man. How is it
possible that God, the creator of the universe and all things in it could
have intentionally created such a hateful and violent creature as the
human? And after creating us in this disturbing way, in his image, the
God of love and the God of forgiveness, turned into a god of retribution,
punishment, vengeance, but also a god of reward if he got what he
wanted. And mostly he wanted a load of material things like gold, silver,
saffron, foods of a wide variety, special favours and he even requested his
pilgrims to go to war in his name, destroying man, woman and beast. The
Bible is filled with these kind of stories which are too close for comfort
to the materialistic and obsessive desires by mortal beings, and are not
becoming of the benevolent God who lives in spirit, filling every crevice
of the universe.
Here is an interesting comparison between the brutality of modern
dictators, and the vengeance and brutality of god. Note that I use ‘god’
instead of ‘God’, as we are beginning to discover that there is a vast
difference between the two, which has evaded simple man for millennia.
We are going to indulge in four multiple choice quizzes to get to know
‘our god’ a bit better. I urge you to take out a pencil and mark your
answers as you work your way through them.First quiz: ‘The Wrath of Dictators’
Objective: Please answer the following questions in an attempt to
determine the number of living things that were killed by dictators, or in
the name of dictators in the past. The answers are displayed after the
quiz.
How many men did Stalin’s
How many men did Genghis Khan
henchmen kill in one day
1) kill because someone decided to 2)
because they failed to say
peek into his chest of treasures?
they supported Stalin?
None. He certainly wouldn't kill
None, Stalin doesn't kill
someone merely for examining his
people for their mistakes.
private things.
200 - those who failed to say
50,070
they supported Stalin, but not
their family members.
1,000 - those who failed to say
Just the people who looked into the
they supported Stalin and their
chest.
spouses.
3,000 - those who failed to say
250. The people who looked into
they supported Stalin and their
the chest and their immediate
brothers, companions and
families.
neighbours.
How many people did the Ku
How many animals did the
Klux Klan kill in a frenzy before
British Royal Guard kill in
3) someone pleased them by ending 4)
Africa in an attempt to
a mixed marriage with the
please the Queen?
murder of the couple?
None. The Ku Klux Klan loves all
None. The Queen is not so
their followers and imposes no
insensitive as to gain
restriction on whom they marry
satisfaction from man's
(so long as the person is of the
slaughter of innocent animals.
opposite gender).Two head of cattle, two rams
and two ravens.
A herd of 100 sheep that he
24,000.
and his men came across in
their conquests.
120,000 sheep and 22,000
None of the above.
oxen.
How many people of Iraq
How many Jews did the SS
were once killed or enslaved
5) deliver to Hitler's concentration 6)
because they didn't give
camps to be slaughtered?
Saddam his due?
120,000 valiant men were
Trick question. The Jews were
killed and 200,000 women and
God's chosen people, hence Hitler
children were taken as slaves
never would have allowed anyone
for cheap labour (not to
to slaughter them.
mention the theft of their
property)
Half a million.
One.
5 million - the number who
Two.
disobeyed his commands.
200 - the number who worshipped
None of the above.
other leaders.
Speaking of cleansing and
How many Ethiopians did Idi
conquering, how many kings
7) Amin kill for his cleansing of
8)
were maimed in the name of
chosen people?
Alexander the Great?
None. Idi Amin doesn't kill
None.
people!
One had his legs broken so he
One million.
couldn’t gather men to from
an army.
Two had their tongues cut out
100.One thousand.
A hundred.
How many soldiers did the US
army burn to death with fire
9) from tanks because they
confronted the killer of 3
innocent priests?
None. The US army would never
engage in such a cruel act.
50.
100.
150 (three sets of 50).
so they couldn’t call the
people to war.
70 had their thumbs and big
toes cut off.
By the time Osama Bin
Laden gets through with his
10)
killing spree, how many dead
will there be?
None. Osama doesn't kill.
Ten million.
One hundred million.
Enough to cover the entire
surface of the Earth.
While these questions may seem deliberately warped, sick and
probably indicative of a psychopathic mind, you don't have to panic. The
answers to these questions are purely hypothetical, because these
questions were actually taken, word for word, from a Bible quiz on a
respectable Christian website. All we did was to replace the word ‘God’
with a notorious dictator or killer. I trust you are as horrified as I was
when I first saw this. I had shivers running down my spine. It reads more
brutally than any horror movie I have seen. And yet, this is the stuff we
teach our children because it was written by some men thousands of years
ago, claiming that they were instructed by ‘God’ to perform these
gruesome acts. I ask you to read these questions and answers with an
open mind. But at this stage, it seems that we are incapable of separating
right from wrong, as we keep justifying these acts of horror, because they
were performed in the name of god. Ask yourself the following; if you
were to commit such acts today, in the way they are described in this
quiz, apparently in the name of god, what would happen to you and how
would the global community react? The answers are actually prettysimple because they have occurred many times in the past, and they will
probably continue to occur for many years to come. If you were to kill or
maim one person, you will be tried and receive a prison sentence of some
length, possibly life or even the death penalty. If you were to kill a small
number of people, you would be called a mass murderer or a serial killer
and you would get life or death, but you will be immortalised in books,
documentaries and movies. You may claim insanity, in which case you
will live in luxury in an asylum where everything is provided for you, till
you die. You will make millions from the book you write and the movie
rights you sell to the highest bidder. But if you kill a few million people,
and you take control of power in a small country where you continue to
rule through oppression, torture and fear, you will become a dictator who
is untouchable by the other governments of the world. Unless you are
Saddam Hussein and you have inexhaustible wealth in the ground of your
land, in which case you will be toppled by the strongest global regime of
the time, against the advice of their allies, because the booty is too huge
to resist.
Either way, the so-called ‘wrath of god’ is too horrible to imagine, and
the reality is too incredible to digest. And so, we teach our children the
stories about the ‘wrath of god’, and we fill them with fear instead of love
and compassion. Such is the nature of the defective genome lurking in
our cells, keeping us entrapped in a cycle of fear, violence and
unspeakable cruelty towards our neighbours.
The quiz that follows points unquestionably to a violent gene passed
onto us by our maker. It smacks of an obsessive human characteristic that
is predisposed to divide and conquer through intimidation, violence,
brutality and fear. Where is the God of love, the God who asks us to love
our neighbour; and to love thy enemy; and to turn the other cheek; and to
forgive them for they do not know what they are doing? Prepare yourself
for a spine-chilling experience. It is truly unbelievable when presented in
this format. I, for one, cannot accept the delusional ramblings of a
handful of men from the past, when they justify their horrific actions in
the name of god. This is not my God, this is not the God who in a moment
of infinite creativity, gave birth to the universe and filled it with aninfinite number of souls to roam the width and breadth of the creation.
There is so little we know about the spiritual realm, but there will come a
day when we will evolve to the point where our genetic make up starts to
open up the portals of our mind to the greater spiritual world, to which we
have been denied access, mainly due to our incomplete genome.
THE FIRST COMMANDMENTS
INSTRUCTIONS OF SHURUPPAK:
Sumerian on clay, Sumer, 2,600 BC. This Early Dynastic tablet
represents the earliest literature in the world. Only 4 groups of texts
are known from the dawn of literature. The instructions are
addressed by the pre-flood ruler Shuruppak, to his son Ziusudra, who
was the Sumerian Noah. Shuruppak's instructions can be said to be
the Sumerian forerunner of the 10 Commandments and some of the
Proverbs of the Bible. Line 50: Do not curse with powerful means
(3rd Commandment); line 28: Do not kill (6th Commandment); line
33-34: Do not laugh with or sit alone in a chamber with a girl that is
married (7th Commandment); lines 28-31: Do not steal or commit
robbery (8th Commandment); line 36: Do not spit out lies (9th
Commandment).
There are so many similarities between the Sumerian tablets and the
books of the Bible, that it instantly begs the question; how is it possible?
If you look at the tone used in the books of the old testament, you will see
that it carries a strong resemblance to the Sumerian transcripts regardingthe behaviour of the Anunnaki, who came to Earth in the distant past. We
will study their behaviour and their actions that resulted in the creation of
our own human species, fast-forwarding the evolutionary process while
restricting the genome of the new species to the bare essentials. From the
Sumerian tablets it will become blatantly clear that the gods who ruled
the world in the distant past were mere mortals with human-like needs
and desires. They may have had advanced knowledge, skills and scientific
ability, but this did not make them God. The strict instructions they gave
man were blatantly designed to exercise absolute control over their
newly-created ‘slave species’. The messages that the so-called prophets
of the Old Testament wrote about, and the messages they conveyed to the
people of their world, were cunningly devised by the Anunnaki to keep
man in his place and punish him if he stepped out of line. The wrath of
god falls perfectly in line with this kind of ‘control-freak’ behaviour and
should never be confused with the will of God, the God with a big 'G'.
CREATION OF THE WORLD
DEBATE BETWEEN BIRD AND FISH –
PART OF THE SUMERIAN CREATION STORY.
Sumerian clay tablet, Babylonia, circa 1,900 BC. About 50-60
sources for the Creation of the Hoe are known. This clay tablet
predates the Old Testament by at least 1,000 years. Could this havebeen one of the many ancient sources that inspired the authors of
Genesis?
Commentary:
Text 1 is a part of the Sumerian creation story, as a literary debate
between the bird and the fish in which they argue for their usefulness
in the universe. It has a substantially variant form of the published
text, and the end is unpublished. Parts of the text are similar to
Genesis 1:20-22. Text 2 deals with the Sumerian belief that the hoe,
one of their basic agricultural tools, was given to them as a gift by the
gods.
It opens with the Sumerian creation of the world and of man, with
parallels to the Bible's two creation stories: "The Lord hastened to
separate heaven from earth" (Gen. 1:6-10); "and Daylight shone
forth" (Gen. 1:3-5). It also predates the 2nd creation story of the
Bible: "The Lord put the (first) human in the brick mould, and
Enlil's people emerged from the ground" (Gen. 2:7).
The next Bible quiz is just another item of proof in our gallery of
evidence. It paints a gruesome picture of god and exposes his true
identity. This was not the loving God some of us have come to imagine,
but rather a materialistic, obsessive and vengeful human-like being whom
Humankind got to worship as god. It is confusing why these ancient gods
of the world would allow someone like Jesus Christ to shake their
absolute control of Humankind, but if we just read between the lines,
their devious strategy bowls us over with its undermining brilliance. In a
few short years Jesus turned the oppressive teaching of the Old Testament
on its head and completely changed the way humans should deal with
their needs and their own humanity. Was he the son of God? Of course he
was! But now that we know who the god of the Old Testament really was,
the identity of Jesus exposes a whole new plot in the entrapment of
Humankind. Did he have special powers? It certainly seems like it and
once we have looked at the Sumerian texts it will all start making very
clear sense. We will come much closer to understanding who the ‘Prince
of Peace’ was and why his message was so important to humanity at thatspecific point in time. So let us take a few steps back now, from the
Prince of Peace to the horrific, vengeful, barbaric acts perpetrated in the
name of god by men in the times of the Old Testament. What was said is
probably quite different from what was written. What is read and
understood is most certainly different from what was said in the
beginning. The ancient tablets have exposed the real truth.
The Bible quiz you have just completed is posed by the Landover
Baptist Church in an attempt to spread the word of God. All it does, is
support the notion that God is not who we have been led to believe. The
original objective was to determine the number of living things killed by
God, or in the name of God in each of the circumstances posed in the
quiz.
Answers to the ‘The Wrath of God’ quiz:
1. How many men did God kill because someone decided to peek
into the ark of the Lord?
Correct Answer: B. (50,070) “And he smote the men of
Bethshemesh, because they had looked into the ark of the Lord, even
he smote of the people fifty thousand and threescore and ten men:
and the people lamented, because the Lord had smitten many of the
people with a great slaughter.” (1 Samuel 6:19).
2. How many men did Moses kill in one day because they failed to
say they supported God?
Correct Answer: D. (3,000) “Then Moses stood in the gate of the
camp, and said, Who is on the Lord's side? let him come unto me.
And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him. And
he said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put every man
his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout
the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his
companion, and every man his neighbour. And the children of Levi
did according to the word of Moses: and there fell of the people thatday about three thousand men.” (Exodus 32:26-28)
3. How many people did God kill in a plague before someone
pleased God by ending a mixed marriage with the murder of the
couple?
Correct Answer: C. (24,000) “And, behold, one of the children of
Israel came and brought unto his brethren a Midianitish woman in
the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the congregation of the
children of Israel, who were weeping before the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation. And when Phineas, the son of
Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he rose up from among
the congregation, and took a javelin in his hand; And he went after
the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust both of them through, the
man of Israel, and the woman through her belly. So the plague was
stayed from the children of Israel. And those that died in the plague
were twenty and four thousand.” (Numbers 25:6-9)
4. How many animals did Solomon kill in a sacrifice to please the
Lord?
Correct Answer: D. (120,000 sheep and 22,000 oxen) “And Solomon
offered a sacrifice of peace offering, which he offered unto the Lord,
two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand
sheep. So the king and all the children of Israel dedicated the house
of the Lord.” (1 Kings 8:63)
5. How many Israelites did God deliver to the people of Judah to
slaughter?
Correct Answer: B. (Half a million) “Then the men of Judah gave a
shout: and as the men of Judah shouted, it came to pass, that God
smote Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah. And the
children of Israel fled before Judah: and God delivered them into
their hand. And Abijah and his people slew them with a great
slaughter: so there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand
chosen men. Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that
time, and the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon
the Lord God of their fathers.” (2 Chronicles 13:15-18)
6. Notwithstanding the above, how many people of Judah were oncekilled or enslaved because they didn't give God his due?
Correct Answer: A. (120,000 valiant men were killed and 200,000
women and children were taken as slaves, not to mention the theft of
property.) “For Pekah the son of Remaliah slew in Judah an hundred
and twenty thousand in one day, which were all valiant men; because
they had forsaken the Lord God of their fathers. ...And the children
of Israel carried away captive of their brethren two hundred
thousand, women, sons, and daughters, and took also away much
spoil from them.”(2 Chronicles 28:6-8)
7. How many Ethiopians did God kill for His chosen people?
Correct Answer: B. (One million) “And Asa had an army of men . . .
And there came out against them Zera the Ethiopian with an host of
a thousand thousand . . . Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and said
Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with
them that have no power, help us, O Lord our God . . . So the Lord
smote the Ethiopians.” (2 Chronicles 14:8-12)
8. Speaking of God's chosen people, how many kings were maimed
in God's name?
Correct Answer: D. (70 had their thumbs and big toes cut off.) “And
they found Abonibezek in Bezek: and they fought against him, and
they slew the Canaanites and Perizzites. But Abonibezek fled; and
they pursued after him and caught him, and cut off his thumbs and
his great toes. And Abonibezek said, Threescore and ten kings,
having their thumbs and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat
under my table: as I have done, so God hath requited me.” (Judges
1:5-7)
9. How many soldiers did God burn to death with fire from Heaven
because they confronted Elijah?
Correct Answer: D. (150 – three sets of 50) “And Elijah answered
and said to the captain of fifty, If I be a man of God, then let fire
come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty. And there
came down fire from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty. Again
also he sent unto him another captain ... And Elijah answered and
said unto them, If I be a man of God, let fire come down fromheaven and consume thee and thy fifty. And the fire of God came
from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty . . . And he sent again
a captain of the third fifty ... Behold, there came fire down from
heaven, and burnt up the two captains of the former fifties with their
fifties.” (2 Chronicles 1:10-14)
10. By the time God gets through with his killing spree, how many
dead will there be?
Correct Answer: D. (Enough to cover the entire surface of the Earth.)
“And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the
earth even unto the other end of the earth: they shall not be
lamented, neither gathered, nor buried, they shall be dung upon the
ground” (Jeremiah 25:33).
(Source: Landover Baptist Church website:www.landoverbaptist.org)
If the above content does not shock you, the years of propaganda have
certainly dulled your senses. Could those possibly be the commands and
the wishes of the God of Love? I do not believe that for one minute. It
stinks of manipulative human characteristics of monumental proportion.
It is amazing how ‘god’ chooses sides, favouring one group of his
creation over another, wilfully and maliciously guiding people to their
death. He changes his mind virtually on a daily basis about his chosen
people. Sometimes he delivers them from harm's way, at other times he
purposely leads them to be slaughtered like sheep. This god clearly
displays the kind of characteristics which he passed onto us. And we
unmistakably display the traits that we could only have inherited from
our maker, since he passed his genetic material onto us; genetically
engineered into us by the scientists of the ancient world, who arrived here
on Earth to set up a base camp and mine the rich minerals in the ground
for use on their planet Nibiru.
ANU THE SUPREME GODTwo separate tablets showing Anu, the supreme commander of the
Anunnaki being served by human slaves. Note the star symbol
representing his godly status and the radiant planet Nibiru.
All this will be breathtakingly revealed when we start to examine the
Sumerian tablets. But if you think that I was lucky and found a few
random out of place examples in the bible, you are very mistaken. The
old testament is filled with acts of horror on virtually every page. It
seems that whoever was trying to control us had a very good strategy.
Fear, punishment and reward. Just look at how successful it has been.
There are still people today who live by those values 4000 years later. It
was actually very simple back then. Just remember that the Anunnaki
gods were dealing with a new, primitive, un-evolved and uninformed
species on Earth, one with no history, no memory, no legends, no culture.
Everything they experienced was brand new to them. It was easy to find
the leaders among them, appoint them in a position of authority by giving
them the exclusive ability to converse with their maker ‘god’ and bring
instructions, warnings, reward and retribution to the followers in the
name of ‘god’. And so the embryonic relationship between the new
species and its god evolved over several thousand years, while the
uninformed slaves were entrapped in the worst kind of slavery possible;
the fear of their creator.
Look how long it takes to rehabilitate battered animals. Some of them
cannot be saved. Some will be fearful of their brutal master for the rest of
their lives. With justifiable reason, because the master beats them and
hurts them for no apparent reason. In this instance, there is no differencebetween the ‘dog animal’ and the ‘human animal’. The fear of the
vengeful god runs so deep in some cultures that it will take hundreds of
years to erase it, and replace it with the opposite emotion and response.
The gods got themselves into the perfect position of power and control
over their primitive creation. We were given clear instructions as the new
slave species; do not question, do as you are told, have blind faith in your
maker, because if you question or disobey, you will be punished. And as
we have seen in the very graphic quiz, the punishment was swift and
severe. So if you are still not convinced that we had a vengeful,
manipulative creator here on Earth in some kind of advanced human
form, here are a few more extracts from the Old Testament to send
shivers up your spine. Once again this food for thought is provided by the
Landover Baptist Church.
Second quiz: ‘The Love of God’
Objective: Please indicate how many people our loving God brutally
slaughtered in each of the following settings:
How many people did
After God brought the Israelites out of
God kill in one day
Egypt, how many of their own people
1.
2.
for having premarital
did they kill, at God's behest, for
sex?
declining to give God His due?
None. God doesn't kill
people for such an
None. God would not order His people to
unfortunate error in
kill each other.
judgment.
10. The number of people who chose to
23,000.
follow Satan.
God once killed a rapist
for having premarital
3,000 spouses and siblings in a single day.
sex but no one else.
None of the above.
Just two dozen total over two weeks.
How many Israelites
How many people did God slaughter in a3. did God kill to punish 4.
David for counting
them?
None. How could
counting people be a
sin? The census bureau
does this every 10
years.
The difference between
the number he counted
and the actual number
of people.
All the people who
were not counted.
70,000 people through
pestilence.
plague because they had the audacity to
question the judgment of Moses and
Aaron?
None. God would not kill people simply
for questioning the judgment of mortals.
14,700 (plus 250 He burned to death with
fire).
Only two people who tried to harm Moses
and Aaron.
A plague occurred but no one was killed.
How many members of other races and
How many Israelites
tribes did the Lord deliver to be
did God slaughter in a
5.
6. slaughtered by Israel because he
plague for whoring
favoured the Israelites and was
around?
prejudiced against other tribes?
None. God would not
kill people just for
None. The Lord doesn't play favourites.
sinning.
24,000.
10,000 Canaanites and
One or two.
Perizzites.
A plague is a natural
10,000 Moabites. B and C, to name but a
phenomenon, not
few of the tribes the Lord delivered for
brought about by God.
slaughter.
How many people did
God kill in Sodom and
How many Assyrians did God kill after
7. Gomorrah for
8. their king and his servants made fun ofengaging in
homosexual acts?
God?
None. God loves all his
None. God is not so fickle He would kill
children, including his
people just for being disrespectful.
gay ones.
Just the ones who
Just the blasphemous king and his
engaged in acts of anal
servants.
penetration.
Every single living
thing in the
185,000.
communities.
Just those who actually
None of the above.
practiced sodomy.
How many Israelites
At one time, when God became
did God threaten to
9.
10. particularly disgusted with the sin of
kill when the tribe
man, how many beings did He kill?
abandoned Him?
None. Sin is inherent in humans. God
None. Killing is not
wouldn't kill people for an inclination he
God's way.
instilled in them.
All of the heads of the
All those who committed repeated
household but no one
violations of the Ten Commandments.
else.
Just those who
Only those who engaged in the most
abandoned Him.
egregious acts imaginable.
90 percent of the
Every living thing (children and unborn
population of each
children included) on the face of the Earth
community.
(except those few residing on an ark).
Answers to the ‘The Love of God’ quiz:1. How many people did God kill in one day for having premarital
sex?
Correct answer: B. (23,000) “Neither let us commit fornication, as
some of them committed, and fell in one day three and twenty
thousand.” (1 Corinthians 10:8)
2. After God brought the Israelites out of Egypt, how many of their
own people did they kill, at God's behest, for declining to give
God His due?
Correct answer: C. (3,000 spouses and siblings in a single day)
“Then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, Who is on the
Lord's side? Let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi
gathered themselves together unto him. And he said unto them, Thus
saith the Lord God of Israel, Put every man his sword by his side,
and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay
every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man
his neighbour. And the children of Levi did according to the word of
Moses: and there fell of the people that day about three thousand
men.”
(Exodus 32:26-28)
3. How many Israelites did God kill to punish David for counting
them?
Correct answer: D. (70,000 people through pestilence) “And Satan
stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel. And
David said to Joab and to the rulers of the people, Go, number Israel
from Beersheba even to Dan; and bring the number of them to me,
that I may know it. . . . And God was displeased with this thing;
therefore he smote Israel. . . . So the Lord sent pestilence upon
Israel: and there fell of Israel seventy thousand men.”
(1 Chronicles 21:1-14)
4. How many people did God slaughter in a plague because they
had the audacity to question the judgment of Moses and Aaron?
Correct answer: B. (14,700, plus 250 He burned to death with fire)
"And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Get you up from among
this congregation, that I may consume them as in a moment. Andthey fell upon their faces. ... and, behold, the plague was begun
among the people... Now they that died in the plague were fourteen
thousand and seven hundred, beside them that died about the matter
of Korah" (Numbers 16:44-49). “And there came out a fire from the
Lord, and consumed the two hundred and fifty men that offered
incense.”
(Numbers 16:35)
5. How many Israelites did God slaughter in a plague for whoring
around?
Correct answer: B. (24,000) "And Israel abode in Shittim, and the
people began to commit whoredom with the daughters of Moab. And
they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods: and the
people did eat, and bowed down to their gods. And Israel joined
himself unto Baalpeor: and the anger of the Lord was kindled against
Israel. ... And those that died in the plague were twenty and four
thousand. "
(Numbers 25:1-9)
6. How many members of other races and tribes did the Lord
deliver to be slaughtered by Israel because he favoured the
Israelites and was prejudiced against other tribes?
Correct answer: D. (10,000 Canaanites and Perizzites and 10,000
Moabites to name a few) “And Judah went up; and the Lord
delivered the Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand: and they
slew of them in Bezek ten thousand men” (Judges 1:4). “And he said
unto them, Follow after me: for the Lord hath delivered your
enemies the Moabites into your hand. And they went down after
him, and took the fords of Jordan toward Moab, and suffered not a
man to pass over. And they slew of Moab at that time about ten
thousand men, all lusty, and all men of valour; and there escaped not
a man.” (Judges 3:28-29)
7. How many people did God kill in Sodom and Gomorrah for
engaging in homosexual acts?
Correct answer: C. (Every single living thing in the communities)
“Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstoneand fire from the Lord out of heaven; and he overthrew those cities,
and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which
grew upon the ground.”
(Genesis 19:24-25)
8. How many Assyrians did God kill after their king and his
servants made fun of God?
Correct answer: C. (185,000) “And it came to pass, when king
Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his clothes, and covered himself with
sackcloth, and went into the house of the Lord. . . . And Isaiah said
unto them, Thus shall ye say unto your master, Thus saith the Lord,
Be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard, wherewith the
servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me. . . . Then the
angel of the Lord went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians
a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose
early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.”
(Isaiah 37:1-36)
9. How many Israelites did God threaten to kill when the tribe
abandoned Him?
Correct Answer: D. (90 percent of the population of each
community) “Hear ye this word which I take up against you, even a
lamentation, O house of Israel. The virgin of Israel is fallen; she
shall no more rise: she is forsaken upon her land; there is none to
raise her up. For thus saith the Lord God; the City that went out by a
thousand shall leave an hundred, and that which went forth by an
hundred shall have ten, to the house of Israel.”
(Amos 5:1-3)
10. When God became particularly disgusted with the sin of man,
how many beings did He kill?
Correct Answer: D. (Every living thing (children and unborn
children included) on the face of the earth (except those few residing
on an ark)) “And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in
the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was
only evil continually. And it repented the Lord that he had made man
on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. And the Lord said, I willdestroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth; both
man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it
repenteth me that I have made them. . . . And all flesh died that
moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and
of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man:
all in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry
land, died.”
(Genesis 6:5-7:22)
As wild as my theories may sound to you, about advanced humanoids
creating a slave species on Earth to perform the hard labour in mines and
other areas, it is not nearly as shocking as the following biblical quiz. It
goes a long way in supporting my theories about the true identity of ‘god’
our maker, depicting his obsession with taking control of the new species,
which was proving to be a handful. After all, they could not allow the
slave species to get out of hand, when they were created as slaves. They
were not here to have a good time. After this blood-thirsty display of
ancient times, we can take a look at how closely it compares to the
military activity we are capable of today, showing that we, the slave
species, have evolved much closer to the levels of our makers, the
Anunnaki. Unfortunately our evolution has not always been for the better.
Please hold onto your hat, the following is truly hard to believe.
THE SACRIFICE OF ISAACThis famous painting by Rembrandt van Rijn depicts the Old
Testament story that epitomises the brutality of the biblical god. It
was this very god who ordered Abraham to take his son Isaac to a
distant mountain, far from the peering eyes of others, and murder
him in cold blood. All this, simply to determine if Abraham –
essentially god’s first ‘snitch’ – could be trusted to obey god’s orders.
Third Quiz: ‘God's Favourite Ways To Kill’
Once again this quiz was posed by the Landover Baptist Church,
providing us with all the evidence we need to show that the so-called god
of man, was no more than a power-hungry and brutal humanoid with
advanced powers. This is how the Baptists justify god’s brutality:
“We all know God has historically killed or tortured those who rub
Him up the wrong way. What you may not realize is that God's
methods of maiming are as varied as his reasons for smiting people.
A Biblical scholar/True Christian should have no difficulty
determining God's favourite way of torturing and/or killing less
desirable folks in each of the following circumstances.”
Brace yourself for some spine-chilling biblical facts:
Which of the following are
How does God handle people who
among God's methods of
1.
2. make Him jealous by having a
punishing those who break
religion different than ours?
His commandments?
He strikes them with plagues,
burning fevers that consume
the eyes, pestilence,
Trick question. God is not vain.
consumption, blasting, the
sword and even mildew.
He has them burned with fire, shot
with arrows, bitten by beasts,
He strikes them with
poisoned by serpents, stabbed with
haemorrhoids, scabs, itching,
swords and dashed to pieces with
madness and blindness.
rods of iron -man, woman and childHe sends wild bears to
devour their children.
Any of the above, depending
on His mood.
including infants, the aged and
virgins.
He gently nudges them in the right
direction.
None of the above.
How does God prefer to torture
3. How does God kill whiners? 4. those who somehow become
enemies of His chosen people?
What? God wouldn't kill
He breaks their bones and pierces
people just for complaining.
them with arrows.
Fire.
He sends hornets to kill them.
He has them eat their own flesh and
Earthquakes.
drink their own blood.
Terminal illness.
All of the above.
How did God express his hatred
How does God kill those
5.
6. toward people living in metropolitan
who vacation in Egypt?
Babylon?
Sword.
By destroying their livestock.
Famine.
By making the women barren.
By turning the men into drag
Pestilence.
queens.
Take your pick.
All of the above.
Whom does God slaughter when
When a community's sins
He gets jealous because a
7. really make God mad, how 8.
community is worshiping someone
does God find comfort?
else?
By killing a third of the
people with plagues and
The women.
famine.
By killing a third of thepeople with local warfare.
The babies.
By killing a third of the
people with international
The unborn infants.
warfare.
All of the above.
All of the above.
How does God punish
promiscuous folks, like men
who have sex with both
In Jesus' time, how did the Trinity
9.
10.
their wives and mothers-in-
deal with nonbelievers?
law and daughters of
priests who sleep around?
He has their genitals
mutilated so they can sin no
They had one eaten by worms.
more.
He ensures their misdeeds
result in unwanted pregnancy
They struck one blind.
or venereal disease.
He has them burned with fire.
A and B.
Any of the above.
None of the above.
Answers to ‘God's Favourite Ways to Kill’ quiz:
1. Which of the following are among God's methods of punishing
those who break His commandments?
Correct Answer: D. (Any of the above, depending on His mood.)
“But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these
commandments… I also will do this unto you; I will even appoint
over you terror, consumption, and the burning ague, that shall
consume the eyes… I will also send wild beasts among you, which
shall rob you of your children, and destroy your cattle.” (Leviticus
26:14-22.) “If thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy
God, to observe to do all his commandments… The Lord will smitethee with a consumption, and with a fever, and with an
inflammation, and with an extreme burning, and with the sword, and
with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall pursue thee until thou
perish… The Lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with
the emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou canst
not be healed. The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and
blindness, and astonishment of heart.” (Deuteronomy 28:15-28)
2. How does God handle people who make Him jealous by having a
religion different than ours?
Correct Answer: B. “They sacrificed unto devils, not to God; to gods
whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up... And he
said... They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God;
they have provoked me to anger...For a fire is kindled in mine anger,
and shall burn unto the lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with
her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains. I will
heap mischiefs upon them; I will spend mine arrows upon them.
They shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat,
and with bitter destruction: I will also send the teeth of beasts upon
them, with the poison of serpents of the dust. The sword without, and
terror within, shall destroy both the young man and the virgin, the
suckling also with the man of grey hairs.” (Deuteronomy 32:17-25.)
“Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shalt
break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a
potter's vessel.” (Psalms 2:8)
3. How does God kill whiners?
Correct Answer: B. (Fire.) “And when the people complained, it
displeased the Lord: and the Lord heard it; and his anger was
kindled; and the fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed
them that were in the uttermost parts of the camp.” (Numbers 11:1)
4. How does God prefer to torture those who somehow become
enemies of His chosen people?
Correct Answer: D. (All of the above.) “God brought him forth out
of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of a unicorn: he shall eat upthe nations of his enemies, and shall break their bones, and pierce
them through with his arrows.” (Numbers 24:8.) “Moreover the Lord
thy God will send the hornet among them, until they that are left,
and hide themselves from thee, be destroyed. Thou shalt not be
affrighted at them: for the Lord thy God is among you, a mighty God
and terrible.” (Deuteronomy 7:20-21.) “And I will feed them that
oppress thee with their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with
their own blood.” (Isaiah 49:26)
5. How does God kill those who vacation in Egypt?
Correct Answer: D. (Take your pick.) “And now therefore hear the
word of the Lord, ye remnant of Judah; Thus saith the Lord of hosts,
the God of Israel; If you wholly set your faces to enter into Egypt,
and go to sojourn there; Then it shall come to pass, that the sword,
which ye feared, shall overtake you there in the land of Egypt, and
the famine, whereof ye were afraid, shall follow close after you there
in Egypt; and there ye shall die. So shall it be with all the men that
set their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there; they shall die by the
sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: and none of them shall
remain or escape from the evil that I will bring upon them.”
(Jeremiah 42:15-17)
6. How did God express his hatred toward people living in
metropolitan Babylon?
Correct Answer: C. (By turning the men into drag queens.) “How is
Babylon become a desolation among the nations. A sword is upon
their horses, and upon their chariots, and upon all the mingled
people that are in the midst of her; and they shall become as women:
and sword is upon her treasures; and they shall be robbed.”
(Jeremiah 50:23, 37)
7. When a community's sins really make God mad, how does God
find comfort?
Correct Answer: D. (All of the above.) “Wherefore, as I live, saith
the Lord God; Surely, because thou hast defiled my sanctuary with
all thy detestable things, and with all thine abominations, therefore
will I also diminish thee; neither shall mine eye spare, neither will Ihave any pity. A third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and
with famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee: and a third
part shall fall by the sword round about thee; and I will scatter a
third part into all the winds, and I will draw out a sword after them.
Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to
rest upon them, and I will be comforted.” (Ezekiel 5:11-13)
8. Whom does God slaughter when He gets jealous because a
community is worshiping someone else?
Correct Answer: D. (All of the above.) “Samaria shall become
desolate; for she hath rebelled against her God: they shall fall by the
sword: their infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with
child shall be ripped up.” (Hosea 13:16)
9. How does God punish promiscuous folks, like men who have sex
with both their wives and mothers-in-law and daughters of
priests who sleep around?
Correct Answer: C. (He has them burned with fire.) “And if a man
take a wife and her mother, it is wickedness: they shall be burnt with
fire, both he and they; that there be no wickedness among you.”
(Leviticus 20:14.) “And the daughter of any priest, if she profane
herself by playing the whore, she profaneth her father: she shall be
burnt with fire.” (Leviticus 21:9)
10. In Jesus' time, how did the Trinity deal with nonbelievers?
Correct Answer: C. (A and B.) “And immediately the angel of the
Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory: and he was
eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost.” (Acts 12:23.) “But Elymas
the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstood them,
seeking to turn away the deputy from the faith. Then Saul, (who also
is called Paul) filled with the Holy Ghost, set his eyes on him. And
said, O full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the devil,
thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert the
right ways of the Lord? And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is
upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season.
And immediately there fell on him a mist and a darkness; and he
went about seeking some to lead him by the hand.” (Acts 13:8-11)And if you think I am done trying to prove a point, you are mistaken.
When I started uncovering the brutality in the Bible and the way it has
been passed down the generations and used as a tool of oppression, fear
and punishment, I was so shocked I could not sleep for weeks. We have to
separate ourselves from these barbaric acts of self-righteous bigots from
days gone by, who have hijacked the true spirit and meaning of God, and
by so doing imprisoned an entire planet for millennia. We must separate
the true spirit of God from the whims and needs of the advanced beings
who settled on Earth and planted the seeds of a violent society among
humans, into which we have evolved so comfortably, seemingly oblivious
of our origins and true purpose. So here is some more food for thought
especially for those who are still not convinced. Another quiz from a
righteous religious group. Trying their very best to glorify the sadistic
words of a lesser god.
Fourth Quiz: ‘God’s License To Sin’
The following excerpt is another statement from the Landover Baptist
Church glorifying cold-blooded murder as long as it is in the name of
God: “The Bible is loaded with verses restricting our activities and
making even the most mundane of human reactions a sin. But if you
carefully scour the Good Book, you'll discover that countless exceptions
to these commandments literally swallow up the rules. Find out how you
can do just about anything you desire by taking the License to Sin Bible
Quiz.”
Intolerance toward the
Murder is a sin, unless your
handicapped is a sin, unless
1.
2.
victim is:
the discrimination takes the
form of:
Not allowing them to
A homosexual.
approach the altar of the
Spouses of a mixed marriage.
Lord.
Someone who urinates on
Expelling them from thepartitions.
Any of the above.
3.
Cannibalism is a sin, unless you
eat:
Trick question. Cannibalism is
always a sin.
Your children, infants, friends and
self when God destroys everything
else so these are all that are left to
eat.
A person who is already dead, if
you're very hungry.
B or C.
5. Self-mutilation is a sin, unless:
You remove a body part that has
engaged or is about to engage in
sin, such as slicing off your genitals
to remain a virgin.
You don a tattoo in the shape of a
religious symbol, such as a crucifix
or angel.
You take action that results in no
permanent body changes, such as a
man shaving his head or trimming
his beard.
Any of the above.
community.
Barring men with damaged
testicles from entering the
church.
Murdering your own child
4.
is a sin, unless your child:
Spoke to you with curse
words.
Encouraged you to join a faith
other than Christianity.
Is killed in the name of Jesus.
Any of the above.
Rape is a sin subject to the
greatest of punishments, but
6.
is easily overlooked and
forgiven if the victim is:
A captive in war.
A slave girl.
Someone you're willing to
marry with a father you're
willing to pay.
Any of the above.Savagely beating another person
Abandoning your family is a
7. with a weapon is a sin, unless you 8. sin, unless:
stop just before your victim dies
and the victim is:
It is a family you have out-of-
One of your domestic help.
wedlock.
It is a family originated by a
Your own child.
mixed marriage (e.g., your
wife is a foreigner)
You abandon them so you can
Either of the above.
spend more time praising
Jesus.
None of the above.
Any of the above.
Killing someone is a sin
9. Homosexuality is a sin, unless:
10.
unless your victim is:
You're in a permanent,
monogamous relationship with your
Any wiccan.
boyfriend.
You're one of God's favourite
A stranger who has the nerve
children, and you have many wives
to approach you.
in addition to your boyfriend.
You're a woman making love to
A virgin raped in the city.
another woman.
Any of the above.
Any of the above.
Answers to the ‘License to Sin Bible’ quiz:
1. Murder is a sin, unless your victim is:
Correct Answer: D. (Any of the above.) “If a man also lie with
mankind, as he lieth with a woman…they shall be put to death.”
(Leviticus 20:13.) “One of the children of Israel came and brought
unto his brethren a Midianitish woman… And when Phinehas… sawit, he rose up from among the congregation, and took a javelin in his
hand… and thrust both of them through, the man of Israel, and the
woman through her belly. So the plague was stayed from the
children of Israel.” (Numbers 25:6-8.) “He slew all the house of
Baasha, he left him not one that pisseth against a wall, neither of his
kinsfolk, nor of his friends. Thus did Zimri destroy all the house of
Baasha, according to the word of the Lord.” (1 Kings 16:11-12)
2. Intolerance toward the handicapped is a sin, unless the
discrimination takes the form of:
Correct Answer: D. (Any of the above.) “Whosoever he be of thy
seed in their generations that hath any blemish, let him not approach
to offer the bread of his God. For whatsoever man he be that hath a
blemish, he shall not approach: a blind man, or a lame, or he that
hath a flat nose, or any thing superfluous, Or a man that is broken
footed, or broken handed, Or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a
blemish in his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his stones
broken; No man that hath a blemish of the seed of Aaron the priest
shall come nigh to offer the offerings of the Lord made by fire: he
hath a blemish; he shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his
God.” (Leviticus 21:17-21.) “And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying, Command the children of Israel, that they put out of the
camp every leper, and everyone that hath an issue, and whosoever is
defiled by the dead: Both male and female shall ye put out, without
the camp shall ye put them; that they defile not their camps, in the
midst whereof I dwell.” (Numbers 5:1-3.) “He that is wounded in the
stones, or hath his privy member cut off, shall not enter into the
congregation of the Lord.” (Deuteronomy 23:1)
3. Cannibalism is a sin, unless you eat:
Correct Answer: B. (Your children, infants, friends and self when
God destroys everything else so these are all that are left to eat.)
“And I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of
their daughters, and they shall eat every one the flesh of his friend in
the siege and straitness.” (Jeremiah 19:9.) “And toward her young
one that cometh out from between her feet, and toward her childrenwhich she shall bear: for she shall eat them for want of all things
secretly in the siege and the straitness.” (Deuteronomy 28:57.)
“Through the wrath of the Lord of hosts is the land darkened, and the
people shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his brother.
And he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he shall
eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied: they shall eat
every man the flesh of his own arm.” (Isaiah 9:19-20.) “Whosoever
toucheth the dead body of any man that is dead, and purifieth not
himself, defileth the tabernacle of the Lord; and that soul shall be
cut off from Israel: because the water of separation was not
sprinkled upon him, he shall be unclean; his uncleanness is yet upon
him.” (Numbers 19:13)
4. Murdering your own child is a sin, unless your child:
Correct Answer: D. (Any of the above.) “And he that curseth his
father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death.” (Exodus 21:17.)
“If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or
the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul,
entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods…thou
shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to
death, and afterwards the hand of all the people. And thou shalt stone
him with stones, that he die.” (Deuteronomy 13:6-10.) “And the
brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child:
and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to
be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake:
but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.” (Matthew 10:21-22)
5. Self-mutilation is a sin, unless:
Correct Answer: A. (You remove a body part that has engaged or is
about to engage in sin, such as slicing off your genitals to remain a
virgin.) “And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it
from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members
should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.
And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee.”
(Matthew 5:29-30; see also Matthew 18:8-9; Mark 9:43-48.) “For
there are some eunuchs, which were so born from their mother'swomb: and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of
men: and there be eunuchs which have made themselves eunuchs for
the kingdom of heaven's sake. He that is able to receive it, let him
receive it.” (Matthew 19:12.) “And no man could learn that song but
the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from
the earth. These are they which were not defiled with women; for
they are virgins. These are they which follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goeth. These were redeemed from among men,
being the first fruits unto God and to the Lamb.” (Revelation 14:3-
4.) “They shall not make baldness upon their head, neither shall they
shave off the corner of their beard, nor make any cuttings in their
flesh.” (Leviticus 21:5)
6. Rape is a sin subject to the greatest of punishments, but is easily
overlooked and forgiven if the victim is:
Correct Answer: D. (Any of the above.) “And when the Lord thy God
hath delivered [a city] into thine hands, thou shalt smite every male
thereof with the edge of the sword: But the women…shalt thou take
unto thyself.” (Deuteronomy 20:13-14.) “And whosoever lieth
carnally with a woman, that is a bondmaid, betrothed to an husband,
and not at all redeemed, nor freedom given her; she shall be
scourged; they shall not be put to death, because she was not free.
And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the Lord, unto the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation, even a ram for a trespass
offering. And the priest shall make atonement for him.” (Leviticus
19:20-22.) “If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not
betrothed, and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found:
Then the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel's father
fifty shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife.” (Deuteronomy
22:28-29)
7. Savagely beating another person with a weapon is a sin, unless
you stop just before your victim dies and the victim is:
Correct Answer: C. (Either of the above.) “And if a man smite his
servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die under his hand; he shall
be surely punished. Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, heshall not be punished: for he is his money.” (Exodus 21:20-21.)
“Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beatest him with
the rod, he shall not die. Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt
deliver his soul from hell.” (Proverbs 23:13-14)
8. Abandoning your family is a sin, unless
Correct Answer: D. (Any of the above.) “Wherefore she said unto
Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of this
bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac… And
God said unto Abraham… harken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall
thy seed be called… And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and
took bread, and a bottle of water, and gave it unto Hagar, putting it
on her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away: and she departed,
and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.” (Genesis 21:10-14.)
“Ye shall not give your daughters unto their sons, nor take their
daughters unto your sons, or for yourselves. Did not Solomon king
of Israel sin by these things? yet among many nations was there no
king like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made him king
over all Israel: nevertheless even him did outlandish women cause to
sin. Shall we then hearken unto you to do all this great evil, to
transgress against our God in marrying strange wives?… Thus
cleansed I them from all strangers, and appointed the wards of the
priests and the Levites, every one in his business.” (Nehemiah
13:25-30.) “If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and
mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and
his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.” (Luke 14:26; see also
Mark 10:29-30; Luke 18:29-30.)
9. Homosexuality is a sin, unless:
Correct Answer: B. (You're one of God's favourite children, and you
have many wives in addition to your boyfriend.) “Thou shalt not lie
with mankind, as with womankind: it is abomination.” (Leviticus
18:22.) “[David said] I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan:
very pleasant hast thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful,
passing the love of women.” (2 Samuel 1:26.) “And as soon as the
lad was gone, David arose out of a place toward the south, and fellon his face to the ground, and bowed himself three times; and they
[Jonathan and David] kissed one another, and wept one with another,
until David exceeded.” (1 Samuel 20:41.) “And [David] had seven
hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines: and his
wives turned away his heart.” (1 Kings 11:3) “For this cause God
gave them up into vile affections: for even their women did change
the natural use into that which is against nature: And likewise also
the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust
one toward another; men with men working that which is unseemly,
and receiving in themselves that recompense of their error which
was meet.” (Romans 1:26-27)
10. Killing someone is a sin unless your victim is:
Correct Answer: D. (Any of the above.) “Thou shalt not suffer a
witch to live.” (Exodus 22:18.) “But those that encamp before the
tabernacle toward the east, even before the tabernacle of the
congregation eastward, shall be Moses, and Aaron and his sons,
keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the charge of the children of
Israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.”
(Numbers 3:38.) “If a damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an
husband, and a man find her in the city, and lie with her; Then ye
shall bring them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye shall
stone them with stones that they die; the damsel, because she cried
not, being in the city; and the man, because he hath humbled his
neighbour's wife: so thou shalt put away evil from among you.”
(Deuteronomy 22:23-24)
As far as I am concerned this is all the proof we need to support the
theory that things were not what we would have liked them to be all those
years ago. There were some weird things going on in the Near East. If
God said that we are all born in sin… all this graphic killing in the name
of God seems a little arrogant, since we were told by Jesus “He who is
without sin, let them cast the first stone”, and we are also supposed to
“turn the other cheek”. What is going on here? Which part of the Bible
should we actually subscribe to? Not one part I say. It has become clearthat this was not a book inspired by the divine God of the universe, but a
sadistic, manipulative advanced being, obsessed with keeping Humankind
under control.
This may be a good time to put this book down, make a cup of tea and
try to absorb all this stuff. It may just take you some time, but hopefully
you will eventually start to distinguish god from the God.
During our violent path to this point in time, we have fought endless
wars and in the process developed some truly remarkable technology. The
research and development that has gone into military weaponry, naval
equipment and aeronautical science has been astonishing. In the past 100
years we have created weapons of such awesome power that they could
destroy the people of the world in a matter of hours if they were
deployed. These deadly weapons come in a variety of forms, but the most
feared are WOMDs (weapons of mass destruction). You may remember
hearing a great deal about these during the Bush-Iraq episode. These
WOMDs can be nuclear… atomic, hydrogen, neutron and other varieties;
they can also be biological… anthrax, botulism, smallpox, mustard gas,
the list is endless. What they have in common, is that they can kill
millions of people in a matter of seconds. While the bombs are usually
dropped from the sky on their designated recipients with pinpoint
accuracy, their delivery may vary. It may even be guided by a laser. The
biological kind is more versatile. They can be delivered in a bomb,
distributed by the wind, in viruses and other microscopic pathogens that
develop into a plague, in the drinking water, in food, medication and
other ingenious carriers. While the bombs explode with a mighty glare of
the sun, obliterating everything in their path for hundreds of kilometres,
biological weapons sneak up on their victims unexpectedly. You can die
quickly, in a few seconds or you can suffer for days maybe even years
before you eventually die a horrible painful death that seems to have no
cure. The most impressive aspect of biological weapons is that there is no
antidote for most of them. Just imagine the kinds of human minds who
invented these as possible solutions to a problem, or as one of the options
to choose from when planning a conflict situation. The long-term benefits
of both kinds of weapons are legendary. It is now known that many of theworld's governments have experimented on humans with biological
substances for over 60 years, in the pursuit of WOMDs development. All
the global powers who were jostling for supremacy were involved in
some form of BW (biological warfare) experimentation.
In their book entitled Plague Wars , Tom Mangold and Jeff Goldberg
give us a gruesome overview of the history of biological warfare. And
while they subtly draw our attention to some quotes from the Bible which
may resemble biological warfare, they may not have been aware how
close to the truth they were. The Germans were not the only ones who
desecrated human rights in this regard. The Yanks performed tests on
their own soldiers in Korea and in Vietnam, the Russians did similar
things, but it is the Japanese who possibly have the most horrific record
of keeping prisoners alive for months while performing unspeakable tests
on them. Dr. Ishii was a Japanese monster in charge of a huge army of so-
called doctors who performed thousands of gruesome experiments on
prisoners during the 1930s. They had built several BW research facilities
throughout Manchuria, turning the whole region into a giant BW
laboratory. About 24 kilometres south of Harbin, was a complex of 76
buildings with labs, dormitories, greenhouses, barns for animals, and
“special prisons for human test subjects”. They would inject the people
with every unthinkable toxin to study its effect. They would let them stay
alive, sometimes tied to their beds in excruciating pain, to witness the
developing effects of these toxins. They would amputate limbs and
disembowel their victims who would scream in agony, sometimes only
dying much later. All in the name of science.
In 1995 The New York Times ran an article which was a discussion
between their correspondent and an ageing Japanese soldier who was
present at one of these dissections. A 30-year-old farmer was taken
captive, tied to a bed and dissected without an anaesthetic. This is what
was written:
“The fellow knew that it was over for him and so he did not struggle
when they led him into the room and tied him down. But when I
picked up the scalpel, that's when he began screaming. I cut him
open from the chest to the stomach and he screamed terribly and hisface was all twisted in agony. He made this unimaginable sound, he
was screaming so horribly. But then he finally stopped. This was all
in a day's work for the surgeons…”
This kind of behaviour can only be explained by our malfunctioning
DNA. No other creature, other than the human, is capable of such horrific
acts against their own kind. But we must have inherited this DNA from
somewhere? Our fascination with biological weapons and man's suffering
associated with it, goes back thousands of years. The Sumerian tablets
carry gruesome details of how people perished from the “evil wind”
which was caused by the gods' deadly weapons.
The weapons that we are exposed to in science fiction movies amaze
us, and yet, somewhere deep inside we believe that it could be possible.
Maybe not today, but sometime in the future. Is the future already here?
Do such incredible weapons exist? How much do we really know about
the latest technologies used by weapons manufacturers? There are many
who claim that lasers and other new precision technology weapons exist,
which work with photons, ions, electrons and ultra-high frequency
radiation. Even ultra low frequency sound waves are now well developed
as weapons and most likely well guarded as national secrets by their
respective governments.
So, where am I going with this? It is uncanny how similar the effects of
modern weapons are when described verbally, to the many descriptions of
annihilation and destruction referred to in the Bible. The similarities are
too close for comfort. If we were created by a more advanced human-like
species with a knowledge of genetics some 200,000 years ago, it must
surely mean that they would also have had the knowledge of the kind of
weapons that we have developed on Earth since then, as we evolved into
our current state of consciousness. And if we compare the wars and
conflicts that are started on Earth today, often as a result of minor
misunderstandings or even a conscious demonstration of power by one
leader over another, it is very easy to reason that the advanced gods of
pre-history used such technology to control and punish their creation in
an attempt to keep them fearful and obedient. There are many passages in
the Bible that clearly point to such violent activity, which could onlyhave been delivered by WOMDs. Many of these biblical situations are
virtually identical to situations described in the Sumerian tablets in which
the gods were either leading, guiding, observing, engaging, rewarding or
punishing the people.
A similar story, which we will expand on later, was depicted in the
Bible surrounding the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. All these
violent acts were supposedly performed by god against the sinful people
on Earth. They seem to have been attacked with biological weapons and
possibly even nuclear weapons. But if you think that such references are
restricted to the ancient biblical days, you are mistaken. The presence of
the ‘god of vengeance’ is reported in great detail by William Bramley in
his book Gods of Eden. Between 1347 and 1350, the whole of Europe and
surrounding lands were struck down by the ‘Black Death’ which arrived
from Asia, supposedly carried by the fleas transferring it from rats to
humans. In those days little was known about the disease, but today we
know there were actually two kinds: Bubonic Plague and Pneumonic
Plague.
Today we have a bit more scientific information about these diseases
and how they spread. The plagues would return to Europe every ten to
twenty years, killing many millions until the 1700s. It is estimated that
over 100 million people died from the Plague during that period. The
people of the world had never experienced anything like this before. Or
so they thought. It was like a plague from biblical days. Swelling of the
lymph nodes, which were called ‘buboes’, vomiting and fever, resulting
in death within two days. Or, shivering, rapid breathing, coughing up
blood, high fever, and death in three to four days. The strange
circumstances surrounding the breakout of this disease has puzzled
scientists for years. The required contact with rats has caused great
confusion, as the disease would strike isolated communities miles apart,
while sparing others. There would be very little rodent activity and it
would normally happen during summer in areas that were not necessarily
heavily overpopulated. According to Bramley, the outbreaks would
usually occur after the appearance of a “foul smelling mist” which went
hand in hand with “seeing unusually bright lights in the sky”. These mistsand lights were the most frequently reported events of those times, just
before the plague suddenly descended on them. It seems that these ‘lights
and mists’ had more to do with the plagues that followed than the large
numbers of rats. Bramley continues with some staggering information.
One year before the first outbreak in Europe, a “column of fire” was
reported over the Pope’s palace in Avignon, France. Another report from
that period talks about “a ball of fire” which was observed over Paris and
remained visible to observers for some time.
Is it possible that the ancient gods of Sumer and Egypt, who flew
around in their ‘sky chariots’ and ‘boats of heaven’ could still have been
active as recently as the 13th century? There is growing evidence to
support such a ridiculous idea. But historians call the ancient events
“mythological” while the more recent ones were just “figments of
people’s imagination”. How convenient. Once more our precious
historians dismiss events which cannot be explained, only to replace them
with a more popular version of their own truth, one which does not seem
too ridiculous to the global populace. Is it possible that while the ancient
Anunnaki gods were trying to keep Humankind enslaved with religious
dogma, they were also attempting to reduce the growing numbers of their
slave species, which would allow them to exercise greater control over
humans? It certainly seems as if such crazy ideas may pack a punch after
all.
The people of those Dark Ages, were extremely superstitious, and the
church exercised immense control over what people did and what they
thought and what they believed. Those were days of high comet activity,
which is well documented, and comets were therefore also always
associated with an impending plague of some sort. Between 1298 and
1314 there were seven large comets reported over Europe. But in those
days the people would call every bright light in the sky a comet. In 1557,
Conrad Lycosthenes published a book with one of the longest titles ever.
A chronicle of prodigies and portents that have occurred beyond the right
order, operation and working of nature, in both the upper and lower
regions of the earth, from the beginning of the world up to these presenttimes.
This was a bestseller of its time that talks about a “comet” that was
seen over Arabia in 1479. “A comet was seen in Arabia in the manner of a
sharply pointed wooden beam…” This description certainly does not
sound like a comet at all. Today it would most likely be called a UFO.
But I have steered clear of UFO talk in this book, rather asserting that we
have much closer historical links to the gods of the ancient world, who
were described as flying in ‘sky ships’ and ‘boats of heaven’. It does
however seem that the dark ages of Humankind were a period of high
UFO activity, whether we like to accept it or not. Similar reports from
Asia also described the death and destruction which followed unusual
aerial phenomena. This is a report by one Asian historian:
“They were confused, exaggerated, frightening, as reports from that
quarter of the world so often are: descriptions of storms and earthquakes;
of meteors and comets trailing noxious gases that killed trees and
destroyed the fertility of the land.” (Bramley)
The outbreak of plague was usually preceded by this kind of aerial
activity which could range from a few minutes before the horror affected
humans, to as long as one year. Another report claims:
“In 1117, in January, a comet passed like a fiery arm from the North
towards the Orient… a year later a light appeared more brilliant than
the sun… followed by great cold, famine and plague of which one
third of humanity is said to have perished.”(Bramley)
This event refers to one third of the population in that specific region and
not necessarily the whole world. But to those people, it was the whole
world. The link between comets and the Plague continued. There were 26
comets reported between 1500 and 1543. A further 15 or 16 were
observed between 1556 and 1597, while in 1618 another nine comets
were observed. Does this not strike you as being highly suspicious at all?
When last did you see a comet? Even if you did see one recently, which is
highly unlikely, since the last visible comet that passed Earth was comet
Encke, in December 2003, which was hardly visible to the naked eye. But
these comets in the distant past were apparently seen by many, during theday as well as at night. They were not described as a distant fiery ball
with a long tail, but described more as a bright light hovering for all to
see.
A report came out of Vienna describing events in 1568: “When in sun
and moonlight a beautiful rainbow and a fiery beam were seen hovering
above the church of St Stephanie… followed by a violent epidemic in
Austria, Swabia, Augsberg, Wuertemberg, Nuremburg and other places…
carrying off human beings and cattle.”
Each time these comets appeared, the people would be struck down
with the Plague. In 1606, a comet caused the death of 37,000 in Prague,
and 46 415 in the Netherlands. But the horror of the Plague was not only
restricted to attacks with some kind of biological substance from the sky.
Have you ever wondered where the classic image of ‘death’ being
portrayed as a skeleton demon carrying a scythe actually originated
from? Other reports of “frightening human-like figures dressed in black”
were also common sights shortly before the Plague would strike.
Appearing on the outskirts of towns and villages, these figures normally
entered the fields of wheat or oats with some sort of spraying device,
distributing what must have been infectious poisons on the crops.
Bramley describes yet another such reported incident:
“In Brandenburg there appeared in 1559 horrible men… fearful
faces and long scythes with which they cut at the oats, so that the
swish could be heard at a great distance, but the oats remained
standing.”
The appearance of such “men” was followed by an immediate outbreak of
the Plague in Brandenburg, for example. The so-called scythes must have
been a spraying device of some sort, the kinds which we would spot a
mile away on a modern farm today. I have personally spent days on my
dad's farm, spraying for larvae with a similar device. The reports did not
stop there, more were reported from Hungary as pointed out by Bramley.
“There appeared so many black riders…but who rapidly disappeared
again…and thereupon a raging plague broke out in the neighbourhood.”
William Bramley points out that “the scythe came to symbolise the act ofDeath mowing down people like stalks of grain.” And these reports of the
Plague have been recorded from all over the world. In China in 1333
“after a terrible mist emitting a fearful stench and infecting the air.” If
you ever smelt a burst gas pipe you would be able to relate to the stench.
Poisonous gas or deadly biological gaseous compounds do not smell
pleasantly. They generally also have a choking effect on the victims. The
reports make it clear that the deadly Plague did not spread from person to
person, it afflicted everyone at the same time. How could it be the result
of infected fleas on rats? This is a very dubious bit of disinformation,
which begins to sound more and more as if the real facts have been
withheld from us. Another event in China describes the situation as such:
“During 1382… the air grew putrid… the plague did not pass from one
man to another, but everyone who was killed by it got it straight from the
air.”
I believe I've made my point. There are however many more examples,
which would begin to sound repetitive. The biological warfare hostilities
against humans which we witnessed in the 20th century, showed us the
gruesome effects of such poisons. It seems that while these kinds of event
were taking place in the first 600 years of the previous millennium, we
have 4,500 year old Sumerian tablets describing similar atrocities
brought upon Humankind by the so-called mythological gods of ancient
times. Even the Bible has many descriptions of plagues and pestilence
being unleashed on the human race by the ‘god of vengeance’. What a
wonderful thread it is that holds it all together. So who is this god of the
Bible who has kept us so fearful for thousands of years? One thing is for
sure, this god certainly puts his money where his mouth is, when he
executes his violent threats against his ‘beloved’ human creation. There
can be no mistake in our conclusion that the god of the Bible is not the
God we all hoped he was. But rather a powerful, anxious, advanced being,
whose ‘primitive worker’ or slave species has grown out of control on
this planet. The advanced beings who the humans have come to worship
as gods have mostly withdrawn from Earth, as the conditions began to
turn against them and they lost control over the large numbers of humansbeing born. Their ‘little’ experiment to create the ‘Adamu’ was an initial
success, but it turned out to be the Great Human Tragedy. So much so,
that some 4,050 years ago some of the Anunnaki gods attempted to wipe
out all of Humankind, with an all-out nuclear attack on all their main
settlements. These events are dramatically recorded in the Bible, Genesis
18, during the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah.
Genesis 18: 23 -29 – God Destroys Sodom.
“The sun had risen on the earth when Lot came to Zoar. Then the
LORD rained on Sodom and Gomorrah sulphur and fire from the
LORD out of heaven. And he overthrew those cities, and all the
valley, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and what grew on the
ground. But Lot's wife, behind him, looked back, and she became a
pillar of salt. And Abraham went early in the morning to the place
where he had stood before the LORD. And he looked down toward
Sodom and Gomorrah and toward all the land of the valley, and he
looked and, behold, the smoke of the land went up like the smoke of
a furnace. So it was that, when God destroyed the cities of the valley,
God remembered Abraham and sent Lot out of the midst of the
overthrow when he overthrew the cities in which Lot had lived.”
It is evident from the Bible that god destroyed more than just the two
cities, as it also talks about the rest of the valley. But the event is
described even more vividly on clay tablets dated back to over 4,500
years and predating the Bible by some 1,000 years. The graphic
description in the ancient clay tablets leave us with no doubt at all, that
the god of the Bible was not our friend, nor our saviour, but was most
certainly our vicious and vengeful maker. It is in his image that we have
been created and it is his violent DNA which we have inherited.
These are translations of Sumerian tablets by Zecharia Sitchin
describing the events on that fateful day when the gods decided to destroy
the world and Humankind with it:
“The evil thing to carry out Ninurta and Nergal were selected… The
five cities of the valley he finished off, to desolation they were
overturned… steam to the heavens was rising… With fire andbrimstone they were upheavaled, all that lived there to vapour was
turned… The horizon with darkness it obliterated… By a darkening
of the skies were the brilliance followed, then a storm to blow
began… Gloom from the skies an Evil Wind carried… Wherever it
reached, death to all that lived mercilessly it delivered… Like a
ghost the fields and cities it attacked… No door could shut it out, no
bolt could turn it back… In the streets were their corpses piled up…
Cough and phlegm the chests filled, the mouths with spittle and
foam filled up… Their mouths were drenched with blood… The
waters were poisoned, all vegetation withered… Everything that
lived behind it was dead, people and cattle all alike perished.”