CHAPTER 12
Slaves and Spies
Romans 6:22
Slavery is a common theme in the Bible.
“But now that you have been set free from sin and have become slaves to
God…”
2 Peter 2:19
Is this an admission that man has been conned by the gods?
“They promise them freedom, while they themselves are slaves of
depravity for a man is a slave to whatever has mastered him.”
‘The apple doesn't fall far from the tree’… ‘like father, like son’… are
just two simple idioms which pretty much capture what actually
happened to humanity in its ancient past. When attempting to trace back
the well-hidden path to our origins, I stumbled upon numerous
fascinating subjects that stopped me in my tracks quite unexpectedly.
Subjects that required more scratching, more investigation. Some of them
are so common in our history and our daily lives, that we never give them
a second thought, and they have manifested themselves as human habits
and behavioural characteristics which have become entrenched in our
cultures and societies. Subjects like gold and jewellery came up and we
had to scratch the surface to see why gold has been associated with
humanity since the cradle, and how gold has so profoundly controlled
many aspects of our evolution. We realise that while we take gold for
granted today and we don't give it a second thought, there must have been
some event in the deep dark history of humanity that caused gold to gain
such an elevated status and resulted in a multitude of socioeconomic
spin-offs that are at the centre of our lives today. Like jewellery,
currency, trade exchange, stock markets, fashion, and more. The little bitof scratching that we do in this book has hopefully revealed some of the
hidden secrets behind gold's relevance in our human history.
You can try this yourself at home, I recommend it. Look at any of the
habits or activities you engage in and try to trace it back to its origin
among humans on Earth. You will be amazed at how much you find out
about Humankind and our behavioural patterns.
One such fascinating subject which attracted my attention was the
concept of slavery. Just like gold, slavery seems to have been around
since the dawn of man. I will try to trace it back to its very start and point
out why we are so entangled in such a barbaric act even today. Just think
about it for a second. Where and when did man suddenly decide that he
could own another person? A moment in which one person elevated
himself way above the other and proclaimed his complete supremacy
over the other. The concept of enslaving another person is arguably the
most abhorrent act of humanity and the most barbaric display of our true
character which is indelibly programmed into our genome. It's as if we
could not really escape this kind of behaviour, as if we were
predetermined to behave in such a way. What is even more unbelievable,
is that the god of the Old Testament does not seem to have a problem
with slavery. In fact, on various occasions god actually instructs men on
how to treat their slaves and how to dish out punishment to disobedient
slaves. In fact the whole idea of slavery was embraced and accepted
throughout the entire Bible, right to the end of Revelations. There are
over 130 references to ‘slaves’ in the Bible, here are just a few of them to
get you thinking about it:
Genesis 21:10
“…and she said to Abraham, ‘Get rid of that slave woman and her
son, for that slave woman's son will never share in the inheritance
with my son Isaac.’”
Genesis 44:10
“ …Whoever is found to have it will become my slave; the rest of
you will be free from blame.”
Exodus 3:7 - 10Clearly showing god's favouritism towards one group.
The LORD said, “I have indeed seen the misery of my people in Egypt. I
have heard them crying out because of their slave drivers, and I am
concerned about their suffering. So I have come down to rescue them
from the hand of the Egyptians and to bring them up out of that land into
a good and spacious land, a land flowing with milk and honey – the home
of the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites and Jebusites.
And now the cry of the Israelites has reached me, and I have seen the way
the Egyptians are oppressing them. So now, go. I am sending you to
Pharaoh to bring my people the Israelites out of Egypt.”
Exodus 21:20-21
“ If a man beats his male or female slave with a rod and the slave
dies as a direct result, he must be punished, but he is not to be
punished if the slave gets up after a day or two, since the slave is his
property.”
Leviticus 22:11
Even priests were allowed to have slaves.
“But if a priest buys a slave with money, or if a slave is born in his
household, that slave may eat his food.”
Deuteronomy 24:7
It was okay for others to be enslaved, but it was deemed to be 'evil' in
the eyes of god, to enslave other Israelites.
“If a man is caught kidnapping one of his brother Israelites and
treats him as a slave or sells him, the kidnapper must die. You must
purge the evil from among you.”
2 Samuel 6:20
David seemingly liked to have some fun with his slave girls, which
was not always to the liking of others. Maybe she was just jealous.
“When David returned home to bless his household, Michal daughter
of Saul came out to meet him and said, “How the king of Israel has
distinguished himself today, disrobing in the sight of the slave girls
of his servants as any vulgar fellow would!”1 Kings 14:10
The repetitive sound of the god of vengeance and fear continues in
these words:
“Because of this, I am going to bring disaster on the house of
Jeroboam. I will cut off from Jeroboam every last male in Israel -
slave or free. I will burn up the house of Jeroboam as one burns
dung, until it is all gone.”
Genesis 9:25
Once more god condones the act of slavery.
“Cursed be Canaan! The lowest of slaves will he be to his brothers.”
Exodus 9:20
People prepared themselves against violent acts of god.
“Those officials of Pharaoh who feared the word of the LORD
hurried to bring their slaves and their livestock inside. But those who
ignored the word of the LORD left their slaves and livestock in the
field.”
Leviticus 25:44-45
A very clear endorsement of slavery and enslaving other nations.
“Your male and female slaves are to come from the nations around
you; from them you may buy slaves. You can will them to your
children as inherited property and can make them slaves for life, but
you must not rule over your fellow Israelites ruthlessly.”
1 Samuel 8:17
Warring, conquering and slavery were the order of the day under
god's rule.
“He will take a tenth of your flocks, and you yourselves will become
his slaves.”
Ezra 9:9
A perfect example how god cunningly turned mankind into obedient
slaves by showing them snippets of mercy and goodwill. This would
have been a reference to Cyrus the Great, who freed the Jews from
Babylonia, and allowed them to go to Jerusalem. But we mustremember who Cyrus was. He was an Aryan Persian king who was
under the influence of the Anunnaki gods, manipulating humans into
all kinds of submission.
“Though we are slaves, our God has not deserted us in our bondage.
He has shown us kindness in the sight of the kings of Persia: He has
granted us new life to rebuild the house of our God and repair its
ruins, and he has given us a wall of protection in Judah and
Jerusalem.”
Nehemiah 9:36
God continued to enslave humans, making them grateful for small
signs of benevolence. Promising reward for obedience and
punishment for defiance.
“But see, we are slaves today, slaves in the land you gave our
forefathers so they could eat its fruit and the other good things it
produces.”
Esther 7:4
God continues to oppress humans.
“For I and my people have been sold for destruction and slaughter
and annihilation. If we had merely been sold as male and female
slaves, I would have kept quiet, because no such distress would
justify disturbing the king.”
Psalm 123:2
And humans keep hoping to please the vengeful god while they
waited for his benevolence. God's barbaric rule over humanity
continues with false promises:
“As the eyes of slaves look to the hand of their master, as the eyes of
a maid look to the hand of her mistress, so our eyes look to the
LORD our God, till he shows us his mercy.”
Jeremiah 34:9
Even the Jews had Hebrew slaves.
“Everyone was to free his Hebrew slaves, both male and female; no
one was to hold a fellow Jew in bondage.”Zechariah 2:9
The god of war sends his loyal human ‘slaves’ to plunder and kill
others.
“I will surely raise my hand against them so that their slaves will
plunder them. Then you will know that the LORD Almighty has sent
me.”
Matthew 20:26-28
“Not so with you. Instead, whoever wants to become great among
you must be your servant, and whoever wants to be first must be
your slave.”
Acts 7:7
God cunningly sets up his people to be forever grateful for his
intervention.
“But I will punish the nation they serve as slaves,” God said, “and
afterward they will come out of that country and worship me in this
place.”
Acts 7:9
“Because the patriarchs were jealous of Joseph, they sold him as a
slave into Egypt. But God was with him.”
Revelation 6:15
“Then the kings of the earth, the princes, the generals, the rich, the
mighty, and every slave and every free man hid in caves and among
the rocks of the mountains.”
Colossians 4:1
God makes it clear that humans are his slaves.
“Masters, provide your slaves with what is right and fair, because
you know that you also have a Master in heaven.”
1 Peter 2:18-21
Here we have a disciple of Jesus justifying slavery, all because god
will reward them for their suffering, they should accept their lot. He
even suggests that Humankind was made to be slaves. It shows theincredible hold this brutal god had over Humankind. Constantly
subjecting them to hardship and violence.
“Slaves, submit yourselves to your masters with all respect, not only
to those who are good and considerate, but also to those who are
harsh. For it is commendable if a man bears up under the pain of
unjust suffering because he is conscious of God… But if you suffer
for doing good and you endure it, this is commendable before God.
To this you were called…”
We can go back to the ancient wars and argue that the concept of slavery
arose out of situations where prisoners were taken and kept as slaves or
sold as slaves. Alexander the Great would not only enslave the conquered
armies, but he would take entire towns, cities and even entire nations of
mothers, fathers and children to be enslaved. If they were not kept by the
conquering side, they would be sold into slavery to some other king in
exchange for gold or whatever they might have agreed to be a fair price
for such a valuable booty of humans. The mere thought of this kind of
behaviour makes us physically ill today, and yet we forget that slavery
only really reached its peak on Earth in the last 500 years.
There is evidence of slavery in Sumer right at the dawn of so-called
civilisation. When we analyse the Sumerian word for ‘slave’, we find that
it translates into ‘mountain man’ or ‘mountain girl’. This is a crucial bit
of evidence for my theory of a slave species. If man, ‘the Adamu’, was
created as a slave to work the gold mines on Earth, he would have
inherited much of his maker’s DNA. This means that the very first things
early humans had to deal with as a brand new species, were gold and
slavery. This is what they were not only born into, but intentionally
‘created’ to do. It stands to reason that if our maker had the genetic
makeup to commit such acts, the offspring would most certainly display
very similar characteristics. The offspring must surely be a ‘chip off the
old block’. And here we are, some 400,000 years later, displaying exactly
the same kind of characteristics, completely oblivious to their origins. It
is highly ironic that man was created and toiled in Africa from the
beginning of time as a slave to the Anunnaki gods, but from the moment
the new civilisation emerged after the flood which ended the last ice-age,the so-called civilised and free human, did exactly as his Anunnaki
‘father’ did. He captured slaves and started behaving exactly like his
maker. Suddenly the two expressions at the beginning of this chapter, ‘the
apple doesn't fall far from the tree’ and ‘like father, like son’ make so
much more sense.
Just picture the children in small isolated communities. They will
inevitably grow up to do one of the things their fathers or mothers did in
the small remote village. They will absorb the local culture, they may
weave, plant certain crops, breed a certain farm animal, wash in a certain
way, eat in a certain way, worship the same way and marry a partner (or
more) according to their tradition. Any suggestion of doing things
differently is seen as heresy to those who have upheld those traditions for
years. They are not aware of the other worldly possibilities, and their
frame of reference is restricted only to what they grew up with. To the
western world this may sound a bit far-fetched , but let me assure you
that this kind of activity permeates much of Africa, Asia, South America,
eastern Europe, the Middle and Near East. In fact, even in the so-called
‘very’ advanced societies like the USA, there are little villages and small
towns which have upheld their traditions for centuries, completely
separated from the rapid modernisation that has taken place around them.
When the Anunnaki gods decided to help humans learn the skills of
survival after the flood, not all humans were convinced that this was a
good idea. Some primitive humans most likely did not trust the brutal
gods who had oppressed them for so long, and therefore many of them
remained in their mountain hideouts, too scared to enter the newly
established settlements of people. It must have looked to them like a new
version of the labour camps that persisted for millennia around the gold
mines. This is why the newborn civilisation did not explode in large
numbers of people, but was rather stimulated by its acquisition of know-
how virtually overnight. But the global gods eventually found those
hidden communities of rebellious slaves and imposed their control on
them in the most remote locations. This is all very clearly illustrated in
the so-called mythologies of even the most remote tribes of the planet.
They all had a similar relationship with the omnipresent gods. But as thenew civilised communities' needs for labour increased, they would do
what came naturally to them: go into the mountains or the neighbouring
village and catch themselves some slaves. After all, those ‘mountain
men’ and ‘mountain girls’ were now deemed to be wild and primitive in
their eyes: ‘Like father… like son’.
But the irony does not end here. When humans adopted their new
wisdom by settling into communities, domesticating animals, planting
crops and taking slaves captive in the mountains around them, where did
they turn to for their supply of slaves next…? Africa. The cycle of life
has now been fully completed. The newly civilised slave species returns
to its place of birth to capture slaves for their own needs. Does that sound
out of line to you? Well it should not. The violent gene was strong in our
DNA then, some 11,000 years ago, and it is still as strong as ever today,
let there be no doubt about that. The greed gene is still firmly encoded in
our DNA and a whole host of other genes that drive our violent, blood-
thirsty behaviour. Slavery is what the human species was born into, and
slavery is what we have known until today.
The incredible thing is that virtually all ancient cultures in the world
were practising slavery at some stage, starting with the Sumerians and
Egyptians. Then came Hammurabi, the priest king of Babylonia who
lived around 2123 to 2181 BC. This was a new breed of human king who
showed distinct signs of mental evolution in the lineage of human-
species-leaders. In essence he was the first great king who established the
first metropolis on Earth, Babylonia. The Code of Law which he laid
down in clay was one of the first recorded sets of laws in human history.
Hammurabi displayed an uncanny feeling for human rights in the face of
his own people's tradition in slavery. He detailed many laws pertaining to
slaves. Slaves were allowed to own property, enter into business, and
marry free women. Formal release by the owner was permitted through
either self-purchase or adoption. Nevertheless, even by this humanitarian
code, the slaves were still considered as merchandise. The ‘Code of the
Hittites’, which was applied in western Asia from 1800 to 1400 BC, was
even more humane by conceding that a slave was a human being,
although of an inferior order. The ancient Israelites experienced slaveryin Egypt, while in the Indus Valley the first documented evidence of
slavery coincides with the Aryan invasion of about 2000 BC. Indian
literature indicates that slavery was allowed throughout India from the
6th century BC to the beginning of the Christian era, but there is no doubt
that slavery was alive and well millennia before that. In ancient Persia,
slaves were actually bred for supply purposes for the hungry slave
markets. Persian victories in the Aegean islands of Chios, Lesbos, and
Tenedos resulted in the enslavement of entire populations. China's entire
history is virtually built on a slave culture going all the way back to
Huangdi, the ‘Yellow Emperor’ and mystical ancestor of all Chinese, the
Xia Dynasty, which started in the 21st century BC.
But the first true slave society in history probably only emerged in
ancient Greece between the 6th and 4th centuries BC. At the slave
markets of Athens, Rhodes, Corinth, and Delos, a thousand slaves would
change hands in an afternoon. Just imagine that kind of setup at the San
Francisco harbour in 2004… the modern human mind would not be able
to cope with such a desecration of human rights. This must surely be a
visible indication of humanity's general state of mental and spiritual
evolution. But things were different in Greece 500 years BC. After a
major battle, as many as 20,000 captives would go on sale. Some say that
Aesop, the legendary story teller, was a freed Greek slave in the 6th
century BC. Next in line was Rome, which became even more dependent
upon slaves when a form of agricultural slavery called ‘estate slavery’
was introduced. After the fall of the Roman Empire in the 5th century
AD, slavery persisted in Arab lands and in central Europe. Many ‘Slavs’
were captured and taken as slaves to Germany where it seems they
retained their derivative name from ‘Slave’. At this stage, slavery across
the world was unstoppable and man's cruelty and greed reached
unprecedented heights. From the very first day of civilisation, man
practised what he was taught by his maker: obsession with gold and
keeping slaves.
Slave-owning societies continued and included the Ottoman Empire,
the Crimean khanate, the Inca Empire in Peru, the Sokoto caliphate, and
the Hausa of Nigeria. It extended to the central Asians such as theMongols, Kazakhs, and various Turkic groups who also kept slaves. As
unbelievable as it seems, slavery was even practised by some native
North American Indian people such as the Comanche and the Creek. Even
in Africa there was slavery among its own people. This is how firmly our
genetic inheritance is entrenched from our maternal donors, the seven
original Anunnaki females who gave birth to the first group of ‘slave
species’, but we will find out more about them a little later. African
chiefs would first sell off their prisoners to the slave traders from Europe.
When these ran out, the chiefs would line up their own criminals and
wrong-doers to be sold into slavery. When this was not enough, they
would simply grab remote and ignorant villages capturing all and sundry
for the slave markets. I hope that this is proof enough of the violent gene
and greed gene embedded in our DNA.
I do however suspect that there will be many who still have a problem
with this concept, so let me take it a bit further. Some men would even
sell their wives or children into slavery to pay off their own debts. This
barbaric, genetically inherited behaviour reached its apex in the 15th,
16th and 17th centuries when an estimated 20 million slaves were
captured in Africa and shipped around the world to places like Brazil,
Caribbean and North America, while trade within Africa itself continued.
The first slaves to have been brought to South Africa came from Angola
on board a Dutch ship called the Amersfoort in 1658, only six years after
the first settlement by the Dutch at the Cape of Good Hope. And because
I am South African, I have a particular interest in the slave history of this
beautiful part of the world. So let's use this as a full chronological
example. The rest of the world's slave trade between the 15th and 17th
centuries evolved in similar ways. According to Mogamat Kamedien,
these are the events surrounding the establishment of slavery in South
Africa.
FORMATION OFTHE DUTCH EAST INDIA COMPANY – THE
VOC
Chamber Representatives of the Netherlands Parliament grants a
1602 founding charter to the Dutch East India Company to establish an
•:
Indian trading empire in the East.
DUTCH COLONIAL SOUTH AFRICA
The Dutch East Indian Company started a refreshment station at
the Cape for its VOC shipping fleet on their way to the East
• 1652:
and/or on their return trips from Batavia (present day Java as part
of Indonesia).
The first shipload of slaves are brought to the Cape, from
• 1658:
Angola, on board the ship, the Amersfoort.
• 1666: Slaves built the Castle Fort Good Hope.
• 1679: Foundations are laid for the Company Slave Lodge.
Slaves at the Cape outnumber free people for the first time.
• 1693: They are mainly from the Indian Ocean, Mozambique,
Madagascar and Mauritius.
VOC decides to retain the institution of slavery as the main
• 1717:
labour system for the Cape.
Evidence exists that runaway slaves had been living at the
• 1725: mountainous Hangklip for extensive periods, between Gordon's
Bay and Kleinmond/Hermanus.
The governor, Tulbagh, consolidated the numerous VOC slave
• 1754:
regulations into a single placaaten, the Cape Slave Code.
A census taken of the Cape colony at the time showed the two
• 1754: populations, both slaves and settlers, to be roughly equal to about
6,000 each.
1st BRITISH OCCUPATION
The British take over control of the Cape and remain in charge
• 1795:
throughout the 19th century.
The British outlaw torture and some of the most brutal forms of
• 1796:
capital punishments.
2nd DUTCH RE-OCCUPATION: THE BATAVIAN REPUBLIC
The Dutch temporarily re-occupy the Cape of Good Hope for a• 1803: short three-year stay.
2nd BRITISH OCCUPATION: BRITISH SOUTH AFRICA
Company slaves are released from the Slave Lodge under rule of
• 1806:
the then Governor, the Earl of Caledon.
The British outlaw the Trans-Indian Ocean slave trade. It was
now illegal to be a slave trader buying or selling slaves, but it
• 1807: was still legal to own slaves. Prohibition on the importation of
overseas slaves resulted in the increase of exchange value of
Cape born Creole slaves.
1st SLAVE REBELLION
The Koeberg Slave Rebellion in the Swartland near Malmesbury,
• 1808: led by Louis of Mauritius, is defeated at Salt River. Resulted in
the capturing of 300 farm slaves as dissidents.
Het Gesticht, the fourth oldest church building in South Africa is
• 1813: erected in 1813 by the inhabitants of Paarl as a meeting house for
non-Christian slaves and ‘heathens’ in the town.
The British House of Commons discuss the conditions of slaves
at the Cape of Good Hope. A commission of enquiry is appointed
• 1823:
due to relentless pressure of the Anti-Slavery Abolitionists
lobby.
2nd SLAVE REBELLION
A second slave uprising at the farm, Hou-den-Bek, led by Galant
• 1825:
van die Kaap, is defeated in the Koue Bokkeveld, near Ceres.
• 1826: Collapse of the Cape wine industry.
SLAVE AMELIORISATION LAWS
The Colonial Office intervened by forcing local colonial
assemblies to bring the local amelioration legislation into effect
through Ordinance 19 of 1826 promulgated at the Cape. This was
in line with the Trinidad Order, aimed at the sugar plantation
slave owners. Thus the British introduced ameliorisation laws in• 1826: order to improve the living conditions of slaves as well as a
series of practical ameliorisation measures to make punishments
less cruel; and the Office of the Protector of Slaves is established
with Assistant Slave Protectors in rural towns and villages away
from Cape Town.
• 1826: Appointment of the Guardian of the Slaves.
Coloured Persons qualified for the municipal franchise of Cape
• 1827:
Town, and a Malay property owner was elected as Wardmaster.
Ordinance 50 of 1828 liberated the Khoisan into the category on
par with Free Blacks and placed all Free Black persons i.e. both
• 1828:
Hottentots and Vrye Swartes on equal legal footing with white
colonists within the judiciary system.
Revised provisions of Ordinance 19 by the British Parliament
• 1830:
resulted in the renamed Office of the Protector of Slaves.
• 1830: Slave owners ordered to keep records of slave punishments.
Stellenbosch slave owners rioted by refusing to accept the order
• 1831:
to keep registers of slave punishments.
More than 2,000 slave owners assembled in Cape Town to hold a
• 1832: protest meeting demonstrating against this government order,
which was adopted without proper consultation.
SLAVE EMANCIPATION
Slavery is abolished in British colonies on 1 December.
‘Liberated’ slaves now fall into the category of Free Blacks,
• 1834:
although the ‘freed’ slaves are forced to serve an extended four-
year apprenticeship to make them “fit for freedom”.
Ordinance No. 1 of 1835 introduced the terms of apprenticeship
• 1835:
at the Cape, including the appointment of special magistrates.
Start of the Great Trek by 12,000 frontier farmers
(Voortrekkers), who demonstrated their unhappiness about the
• 1836:
government's policy to release slaves from the control of Free
Burghers as slaveholders.Non-whites were finally accorded similar treatment to white
• 1836: colonists in their interaction with the public institutions of the
local authorities.
END OF SLAVE APPRENTICESHIP PERIOD
• 1838: End of all slave apprenticeships.
About 39,000 slaves are freed on Emancipation Day,
1 December in 1838. Only 1.2 million pounds was paid out
against the original estimated compensation amount of three
• 1838:
million pounds which was initially set aside by the British
government as compensation monies for the about 1,300 affected
slaveholding farmers at the Cape of Good Hope.
CAPE ‘MASTERS & SERVANTS’ LABOUR LEGISLATION
The Masters and Servants Ordinance was promulgated regulating
and criminalising labour relationships between employer and
• 1841: employee in favour of the former slave masters based on the past
Cape Slave Codes originally issued by the VOC as ‘Placaaten of
India’.
By the 17th century the slave trade was regarded an ‘honourable and
noble’ business in Europe through which many companies generated
immense wealth and caused untold misery. As the inhumane elements of
this trade started to be exposed by small groups of liberals in the 18th
century, many of the so-called honourable businessmen fought their
accusations with all their wealth and influence. By the end of the
19thcentury, one by one, the guilty culprits signed various ‘abolition of
slavery acts’ under pressure from enlightened activists. Argentina 1813;
Colombia 1821; Mexico 1829; South Africa 1834; USA 1865 just to
mention a few. It was however only in 1948, when the United Nations
released the ‘Proclamation of Human Rights Declaration’, which in
essence prohibited slavery worldwide. But the United Nations left a huge
loophole in the previous declaration, which took another eight years to
rectify. They were forced to add a further declaration which dealt with
“slave trade and institutions similar to slavery”. To most people todaythis bit of information will come as a horrific shock: how is it possible
that slavery was only officially prohibited in 1956 by the so-called ‘free
and civilised’ world? Let me remind you of an earlier sentiment which
suggests that “if we don't know where we come from, how can we
possibly know where we are going?” For as long as people keep their eyes
closed to new evidence and their minds poisoned against new
possibilities, we will continue to propagate the ‘slave species’
characteristics which our maker so successfully implanted in us. We were
created as a slave species and to this day we remain a slave species, held
captive by our ignorance, lack of clarity about our human origins and the
stunted genome with which our maker has endowed us.
Even after the 1956 UN proclamation, the inhumane trade in people did
not stop. 11,000 years since the emergence of civilised man nothing has
really changed. Saudi Arabia only signed the ‘abolition of slavery act’ in
1963 and Mauritania in 1980. Is it not incredibly ironic that it is once
again in Africa, the cradle of man, the birthplace of slavery on Earth, that
we find the last place to let go of this abhorrent custom? Slavery is so
deeply and firmly rooted in the African ancestry, that it seemingly cannot
be escaped. But slavery is still alive and well in the 21st century. It seems
that certain parts of our DNA have not evolved at all. In 1988 slaves were
sold in Sudan for 30 pounds, and in 1989 China launched a national
campaign against the trade in ‘women and children’ slaves. The effort
uncovered 9,000 cases of slavery in that year alone. My guess is that this
was only the tip of the iceberg in China.
In this technologically advanced global village where every sensational
event is reported by global networks within seconds; where
communication has become child’s play; where we look at Mars rovers
with a certain amount of impatience because we want them to do more
stuff, and do it quicker... how free are we really? We spoke about
economic warfare in earlier chapters, but it should also be referred to as
‘economic slavery’. This applies to individuals as well as poor countries.
In this case the conquering armies do not take prisoners as slaves, they
simply enslave the entire country economically. The total indebtedness ofpoor countries to wealthy countries is so incredibly vast, that it most
likely can never be repaid. The strange thing is, that most of the poor
countries of the world are those who were raped for slaves by the West
for centuries. This rape of many nations understandably resulted in the
complete collapse of such countries, that all eventually had to ask for
assistance from the aggressor. What a conniving and calculating bunch of
‘civilised’ humans we are.
Today, the slavery principal continues under this economic banner
extremely successfully. The poor countries are exploited for cheap
labour, they become the dumping grounds of global unwanted produce,
deadly unwanted chemicals and nuclear waste, basically continuing to be
enslaved on virtually every level; even their terra firma has become
enslaved. Their currencies remain weak, their people remain poor and
they have no choice but to allow the bullies to abuse them. But the abuse
does not always come from outside the borders. The slavery problems in
China are potentially nothing to what is brewing right next door in India.
The highly discriminating class system called ‘caste’, which originates
from the Portuguese casta, meaning breed, race or kind, is still widely
practised throughout India. Although this form of discrimination is
officially prohibited, it is alive and well, serving as a legitimate cultural
form of slavery, which holds close to half the population of one billion
Indians enslaved in poverty and misery, with virtually no way out. Once
you are classified as a Dalit or ‘untouchable’ your lot has been
determined for life. It is virtually impossible to elevate yourself to one of
the four higher classifications which may make your life more bearable.
There are approximately 200 million ‘untouchable’ Dalits in India today.
They may not marry anyone from a higher class, they may not use the
same amenities as others, they must at all times be invisible to the higher
castes, getting out of their way so that not even their shadows may touch
in passing. In some situations, towns and villages will insist that Dalits
carry a bell to warn any other higher castes of their approaching ‘vile’
presence.
So how free are we really? You may think that because you live in a
First World economy you are okay, that you are the master of your owndestiny and that you are nobody’s slave. Well, think again. The successful
westerners are slaves to their jobs; their boss; their mortgage bond; an
array of credit cards; car loan; overdraft and other significant
entrapments of society. The modern economies are structured to attract as
many consumers as possible, with the promise of some sort of credit.
Even your student loan can enslave you for years. Once you are hooked,
the onus is squarely on your shoulders to pay the creditor without default.
You may tell everyone that “this is your new home”, but the reality is that
it actually belongs to the bank. They just allow you to work your backside
off for 20 years, paying them a large sum every month, making
nauseating amounts of interest from you in the process. So who is the
slave? If you cannot pay, they auction your home at market value, in
many cases still leaving you with a large debt to cover. Now that you are
really deeply in trouble, they blacklist you, which dramatically reduces
your chances for employment, of keeping a bank account, and making
back the money which you owe them. The credit card is the same. You
pay for your Caribbean trip with your card, feeling very fulfilled. Upon
your return, you realise that your company has gone insolvent and the
card becomes an instant trap. You have to sell your car to pay off the card
and now you can't get around to launch your new business. The worst and
most clandestine form of slavery is the good old student loan. Thousands
of companies will give you a student loan with the condition that you
work for them to pay it off after graduation. The snag is that they decide
on your measly salary as an apprentice, which means that you have to
work for them for years while earning very little, essentially becoming
extremely cheap labour. This happens year in, year out, around the world
to millions of graduates. Basically, our lives revolve around work and
money. We behave like confused slaves on this planet, not knowing
where we are going… why we are here… and who is really in control?
Why are we chasing these castles in the sky? Is there a hidden message
here? Could this possibly be a hangover from prehistory, when early man
was promised a trip up to god’s castle in the sky… and to live in the
house of the maker, but only if he performed valiantly and pleased his
master? Really… why are we so caught up in this chase for materialisticrewards, if we know that we can't take it with us?
The answer is simple. We are still slaves living in the 21 st century, but
our path to this point in time has been so meticulously planned by the
‘gods’ of our prehistory, that we could never expect to recognise the clues
or symptoms. Our arrogance prevents us from even believing such wild
and extravagant theories because “we are the masters of ourown
destinies”.
Our entire history is riddled with temptation from a variety of sources.
From biblical promises of heavenly wealth and eternal life, to the
Sumerian tablets outlining the promises of great reward in the houses of
the gods. But only if you behaved, obeyed and performed the tasks that
were assigned to you. Is this the seed which has driven man to toil and
perform for ever? Is it a hangover reflex response from days gone by,
when the Anunnaki gods were still on Earth? It certainly smacks of
something which eludes us to this day. After all, we are the slave species
and so we shall behave. All that has happened in the past few thousand
years, is that we confused the reason with motive, which has resulted in
the continuous frantic chase for material stuff. We want to accumulate
and hoard. There is so much baggage and disinformation piled up in our
human subconscious, that we cannot possibly begin to unravel it without
huge amounts of investigation and especially introspection. Because the
messages we are discovering from our distant ancestors are not the
fairytales we expected to hear.
The people of the ‘free’ western world are enslaved economically,
culturally and religiously. But if you ask them, they will deny it. We are
enslaved to our jobs, our banks and our governments. If you don't pay
your tax, you will go to jail. This blissful ignorance is exactly what the
‘maker’ had planned. The Tower of Babel incident was a wonderful
example of how the gods conspired to keep humanity enslaved through
their ignorance. The Sumerian scriptures make similar references to the
incident as is described in the Bible, where the gods had decided that man
had grown too wise and was speaking one ‘language’. The use of the word
‘language’ could be metaphorical for knowledge. The gods felt that ifthey left man to his own devices, he would be capable of anything. This
posed a big threat to the gods, when suddenly Humankind displayed the
potential to stand up against their maker and oppressor. At that point the
gods decided to “go down from their heavenly abode and confuse their
language”, which they did. It is not exactly clear what they did to
humans, but it certainly extended the slave mentality for millennia. What
is very interesting however, is that Genesis 10 ends with the sons and
descendants of Noah, scattering around the world, belonging to different
clans and speaking different languages. Then suddenly, Genesis 11 starts
with the following statements.
Genesis 11: 1 -9. The Tower of Babel:
“Now the whole world had one language and a common speech. As
men moved eastward, they found a plain in Shinar and settled there.
They said to each other, ‘Come, let's make bricks and bake them
thoroughly.’ They used brick instead of stone, and tar for mortar.
Then they said, ‘Come, let us build ourselves a city, with a tower
that reaches to the heavens, so that we may make a name for
ourselves and not be scattered over the face of the whole earth.’ But
the LORD came down to see the city and the tower that the men
were building. The LORD said, ‘If as one people speaking the same
language they have begun to do this, then nothing they plan to do
will be impossible for them. Come, let us go down and confuse their
language so they will not understand each other.’ So the LORD
scattered them from there over all the earth, and they stopped
building the city. That is why it was called Babel, because there the
LORD confused the language of the whole world. From there the
LORD scattered them over the face of the whole earth.”
This entire passage smacks of a ‘master-slave’ relationship. This is
virtually a copy of the Sumerian tablets where the gods were also very
unhappy that the slaves were making rapid progress, gaining knowledge
and showing signs of higher intelligence. It's fairly plain to read between
the lines that ‘god the master’ panicked and took the necessary steps to
prevent people from gaining skills and knowledge. The principle of‘divide and conquer’ was implemented very successfully among the
emerging human threat. The simple fact that the sons of the gods were
having children with the daughters of man was a huge problem. The ‘new
human offspring’ were even more intelligent than their human mothers,
because they had more of the gods’ DNA which allowed them to achieve
more and evolve quicker.
Genesis 6:1-4:
"When men began to increase on earth and daughters were born to
them, the divine beings saw how beautiful the daughters of men
were and took wives from among those that pleased them. The
LORD said, ‘My breath shall not abide in man forever, since he too
is flesh; let the days allowed him be one hundred and twenty years.’
It was then, and later too, that the Nephilim appeared on earth -
when the divine beings cohabited with the daughters of men, who
bore them offspring. They were the heroes of old, the men of
renown."
There is no doubt that the fathers who were the sons of the gods also
contributed to the technological know-how of their children. We can
deduce from this kind of activity on Earth, that man's evolution was
speeded up rapidly, which went against the explicit wishes of the ruling
gods. They wanted to keep ‘man’ stupid. So, it is of particular interest
that in Genesis 6 verse 7, god suddenly became ‘plural’ and plans to go
down with some of his associates to sort out this problem. “Come let us
go down and confuse their language.”
Who was god talking to and who went down with him? And why would
god look unfavourably on human technological progress? Why would god
not want his special creation, man, to be able to do ‘other’ things. Why
would god be so freaked out with man's rapid advancement?
The Tower of Babel incident was preceded by an earlier attempt to get
rid of humans because they were already posing a prior threat to the gods.
Once again this indicates an ultimate act of oppression which outlined the
control that the gods maintained over the slave species while plotting
their complete demise. For some reason the gods decided that theircreation ‘man’ was evil and that all he knew was evil; that's pretty much
how the Bible puts it. I sense that the gods had had enough of the humans
and realised that they had created a ‘monster’ which could rise up and
bite them. The Sumerian tablets tell the story of an impending tidal wave
that would destroy most of humanity, especially those who lived near the
coastal areas. In December 2004, we saw how easily 300,000 people died
from a relatively small Tsunami in large parts of the world. Imagine what
a 100-metre high tidal wave could do to the world. But the Anunnaki
already knew of such a giant wave which would sweep the Earth as a
result of their planet Nibiru coming back into close proximity to the
world. So they decided that they would allow this wave to destroy
humanity and in one fell swoop help them to take care of their growing
human problem. It is estimated that there were four million of the slave
species on Earth by this stage, far outnumbering the gods. This made the
gods very nervous, so they would allow the slaves whom they created, to
be destroyed because their behaviour was showing signs of uncontrollable
intelligence.
Did the slaves start asking too many questions? Did they start evolving
too quickly and were they absorbing advanced technical knowledge
without the gods’ permission? It certainly seems that way. By now you
must have figured out that I am of the opinion that the Bible cannot be
trusted, no matter how emotional we get about it. It is surrounded with so
much controversy and there is no absolute proof who the real authors
were, and under what influence they wrote those brutal descriptions of
events of their times. Furthermore, because most of the Old Testament is
a diluted version of Sumerian tablets and other ancient texts, it is
therefore a paradox in itself that I am using the Bible as a major source of
reference. This, my friends, is purely to demonstrate the inconsistency
and fanatical obsession bestowed on this book by those who so dearly
worship it. By the time we reach the story of the biblical flood, I would
like to reason that the Anunnaki gods did not count on the rapid evolution
of the human brain, which is why the gods wanted the growing number of
humans to be destroyed in the flood. In short, the human slaves were
suddenly a potential threat to the gods. But one of the two leading gods,Enki, was much closer to the humans than his cold-hearted brother Enlil.
Because Enki had worked with the human slaves in the African mines for
millennia, he took pity on the humans and warned Ziusudra (Noah) of the
impending disaster. He gave him strict instructions on what to do, to save
his friends and family and his livestock. It turns out that this was not just
a random gesture of mercy, but Ziusudra was actually Enki's son with an
Earthling female. This was the real motive behind his actions.
The Bible puts it slightly differently. “God saw that everything man
did was evil.” Suddenly all the people on Earth were 'vile and evil' and
god decided to punish them. Is it possible that the story recorded in the
Bible came from an opposing point of view, from Enki's brother Enlil,
who was in command of the planet and its people? Enlil never really
liked the slave species and this provided him with a perfect opportunity
to destroy them.
What could all the people on Earth have possibly done that was so vile
and evil, to have enraged god so much, that he plotted to destroy all of
them? The fascinating thing is that the flood story has been told in most
of the ancient cultures which pre-date the biblical story of Noah. So
which one of them is more accurate and factual? My guess is that it
should be the oldest one. This should make the Sumerian flood story
about Enki and Enlil and Ziusudra the most credible story. And this is
where the plot thickens even further. The sons of the Anunnaki gods, who
were also referred to as the Nefilim, were prohibited from having
intercourse with the human females for fear of creating a new subspecies,
which would be more intelligent, and a potential threat to the Anunnaki.
We have heard about them before, even in the Bible. But the sons of the
gods were young and restless on Earth, showing the usual signs of
rebellious youth. They obviously disobeyed the instructions, especially
when they saw how sexual the daughters of man were. Both the Sumerian
scripts and the Bible tell us explicitly what happened next. ‘God’ decided
to pull the ultimate act of supremacy over his disobedient slave species,
which was to destroy all of them. This would allow him to clear the slate
and start again with no loose ends and especially no disobedient and
nosey humans. This is how the Bible describes it:Genesis 6:4-18. The Flood:
“The Nephilim were on the earth in those days and also afterward
when the sons of God went to the daughters of men and had children
by them. They were the heroes of old, men of renown. The LORD
saw how great man's wickedness on the earth had become, and that
every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil all the
time. The LORD was grieved that he had made man on the earth, and
his heart was filled with pain. So the LORD said, ‘I will wipe
mankind, whom I have created, from the face of the earth…’
But Noah found favour in the eyes of the LORD .
This is the account of Noah:
Noah was a righteous man, blameless among the people of his time,
and he walked with God. Noah had three sons: Shem, Ham and
Japheth. Now the earth was corrupt in God's sight and was full of
violence. God saw how corrupt the earth had become, for all the
people on earth had corrupted their ways. So God said to Noah, ‘I am
going to put an end to all people, for the earth is filled with violence
because of them. I am surely going to destroy both them and the
earth… I am going to bring floodwaters on the earth to destroy all
life under the heavens… Everything on earth will perish. But I will
establish my covenant with you…’”
Now there is a wonderfully ironic example of favouritism by the all-
loving ‘god’, who made ‘all’ people equal. Suddenly Noah was his
favourite one, and the only kosher guy on the face of the Earth. This is a
little too rich for me… there must have been some other motive and the
motive I place before you makes much more sense that any others I have
read. That is especially in light of the inconsistency in the story when
viewed from the two brother-gods’ point of view, which presents us with
a juicy bit of circumstantial evidence as to what exactly may have
happened. We had two distinct personalities in Enlil and Enki with
opposing views on the slave species. Enki wanted to save man, therefore
he warned Noah (Ziusudra), who also happened to be his earthling son,
but he warned more than just Noah. Therefore the biblical entry whichproclaims Noah to be the only righteous man on Earth makes no sense.
This is where it gets really interesting, because it feels as if this part of
the biblical story was written only after the event of the flood, from the
perspective of Enlil, who suddenly realised that he had failed in his quest
to wipe out the human race. This failure to dispose of the troublesome
human population forced Enlil to alter his entire story, hiding the fact
that he had failed. It really feels like a lot of sour grapes to me and the
entries in the Bible were written so as to hide the fact that god had failed
in destroying the vile and evil humans, but instead he found one
‘righteous’ man among them to take pity on. After the flood, Enki took
humans under his wing and started to teach them all the necessities of a
civilised community, at which point we witness the emergence of sudden
global civilisation around 11,000 BC. But their rapid evolution scared
Enlil, especially when the humans built the tower of Babel in an attempt
to reach their gods in the sky. So, it was probably the spiteful Enlil who
destroyed the tower and caused them to scatter over the world in another
attempt to slow down their progress. They were after all, his creation, his
slaves and he could do with them as he pleased. It may come as a surprise
to learn that there are literally hundreds of ‘Flood Stories’ in early human
history.
SUMERIAN FLOOD STORY
Neo-Sumerian on clay, this is mankind's
oldest reference to the Deluge, together with a tablet in Philadelphia,
the only other tablet bearing this story in Sumerian. In this transcriptZiusudra, the Sumerian Noah, is described as “the priest of Enki”,
which is new information. Other tablets outline that he is actually the
son of Enki.
The Sumerian flood story is the oldest forerunner to the Biblical
account of the flood. (Genesis 6:5-9:29) According to the British
Museum, their ‘Neo-Babylonian’ tablet with the Flood story as a part
of the ‘Epic of Gilgamesh’, is the most famous tablet in the world.
The tablet shown here is over 1,000 years older than the one in the
British Museum.
ENLIL DECIDES TO DESTROY Humankind WITH A
FLOOD
The Atra-Hasis epic is the Babylonian
flood story written in Old Babylonian on clay in Babylonia circa 1900
BC in cuneiform script. When the Neo-Babylonian account of the
flood story as part of the ‘Gilgamesh Epic’ was discovered in the 19
thcentury, it caused a sensation. It turned out that this was an
abbreviated account extracted from the Old Babylonian Atra-Hasis
epic, written some 1,000 years earlier. The flood is the climax of the
whole story in which the gods created the human race to take over the
hard labour on Earth. They were created with the power to
reproduce, but were condemned to die as a result of age. The human
race multiplied and made such a noise that the chief Sumerian god,
Enlil, could not sleep. He therefore plotted to reduce their numbers,first by plague, then by famine. In each case the god Ea (Enki), who
was mainly responsible for creating the human race, frustrated the
plan. Enlil then got all the gods to swear to co-operate in
exterminating the whole human race in an impending flood. This
failed because Enki saved his favourite, Ziusudra, by allowing him to
build an ark and so save the human race and the animals. This tablet
starts after the famine attempt by the gods had just failed, Enlil
plotted against Humankind and came up with another plan.
Partial tablet translation:
“…THEY BROKE THE COSMIC BARRIER! - THE FLOOD
WHICH YOU MENTIONED, WHOSE IS IT? - THE GODS
COMMANDED TOTAL DESTRUCTION! ENLIL DID AN EVIL
DEED ON THE PEOPLE! THEY COMMANDED IN THE
ASSEMBLY OF THE GODS, BRINGING A FLOOD FOR A LATER
DAY, ‘LET US DO THE DEED!’ ATRA-HASIS…”
This is a good time to take a look at some of the other flood stories
from around the world, to see the incredible similarities in these stories
which were written on different continents, thousands of miles apart, by
‘primitive’ people, hundreds of years apart. Does that not ring very loud
alarm bells with you? Mark Isaak has compiled an incredible collection
of these stories at www.talkorigins.org and I would urge you to see his
website for truly captivating reading. Here are a few excerpts:
Greek:
“Zeus sent a flood to destroy the men of the Bronze Age.
Prometheus advised his son Deucalion to build a chest. All other
men perished except for a few who escaped to high mountains.
When the rains ceased, he sacrificed to Zeus, the God of Escape. An
older version of the story told by Hellanicus has Deucalion's ark
landing on Mount Othrys in Thessaly. Another account has him
landing on a peak, probably Phouka, in Argolis, later called Nemea.”
“The Megarians told that Megarus, son of Zeus, escaped Deucalion's
flood by swimming to the top of Mount Gerania, guided by the cries
of cranes.”“An earlier flood was reported to have occurred in the time of
Ogyges, founder and king of Thebes. The flood covered the whole
world and was so devastating that the country remained without
kings until the reign of Cecrops.”
Roman:
“Jupiter, angered at the evil ways of humanity, resolved to destroy it.
He was about to set the earth to burning, but considered that that
might set heaven itself afire, so he decided to flood the earth instead.
With Neptune's help, he caused storm and earthquake to flood
everything but the summit of Parnassus, where Deucalion and his
wife Pyrrha came by boat and found refuge. Recognizing their piety,
Jupiter let them live and withdrew the flood. Deucalion and Pyrrha,
at the advice of an oracle, repopulated the world by throwing ‘your
mother's bones’ (stones) behind them; each stone became a person.”
Scandinavian:
“Oden, Vili, and Ve fought and slew the great ice giant Ymir, and
icy water from his wounds drowned most of the Rime Giants. The
giant Bergelmir escaped, with his wife and children, on a boat.
Ymir's body became the world we live on.”
Celtic:
“Heaven and Earth were great giants, and Heaven lay upon the Earth
so that their children were crowded between them, and the children
and their mother were unhappy in the darkness. The boldest of the
sons led his brothers in cutting up Heaven into many pieces. From
his skull they made the firmament. His spilling blood caused a great
flood which killed all humans except a single pair, who were saved
in a ship made by a beneficent Titan.”
Welsh:
“The lake of Llion burst, flooding all lands. Dwyfan and Dwyfach
escaped in a mastless ship with pairs of every sort of living creature.
They landed in Prydain (Britain) and repopulated the world.”
There are many more flood stories such as Lithuanian, German, Turkish,Vogul, Egyptian and Persian. Even the Koran (11:25-48) refers to the
flood, adding that the Earth swallowed the water, and the boat came to
rest on a mountain called Al-Judi, and one of Noah's disbelieving sons
drowned in the flood.
An apocryphal scripture tells us how Adam instructed that his body,
together with gold, incense, and myrrh, should be taken aboard the Ark
and, after the flood, should be laid in the middle of the Earth. God would
come from thence and save mankind (Platt, p. 66, 80 and 2 Adam 8:9-18,
21:7-11). Here we are really mixing the history of Humankind. Wasn't
Adam dead by then? How would he know that a flood was looming to
give such instructions? How sure are we of these facts?
The Babylonian tale is virtually identical to the Sumerian story and even
the Chaldean story is filled with Sumerian influence. Remember that the
Sumerian Noah was called Ziusudra:
“The god Chronos in a vision warned Xisuthrus of a coming flood,
ordered him to write a history and bury it in Sippara, and told him to
build and provision a vessel (5 stadia by 2 stadia) for himself, his
friends and relations, and all kinds of animals, all of which he did.
After the flood had come and abated somewhat, he sent out some
birds, which returned. Later, he tried again, and the birds returned
with mud on their feet. On the third trial, the birds didn't return. He
disembarked in the Corcyraean mountains in Armenia and, with his
wife, daughter, and pilot, offered sacrifices to the gods.”
The Zoroastrian story:
“After Ahura Mazda has warned Yima that destruction in the form
of winter, frost, and floods, subsequent to the melting of the snow,
are threatening the sinful world, he proceeds to instruct him to build
a vara, ‘fortress or estate’, in which specimens of small and large
cattle, human beings, dogs, birds, red flaming fires, plants and
foodstuffs will have to be deposited in pairs.” (Dresden, p. 344)
What all these stories really point to is a time and place when the gods of
Heaven and Earth conspired to wipe out all of humanity. Why? Becausethey were showing signs of independence, intelligence and possible
rebellion against their makers. I have presented you with their motives
which have been expanded on by many scholars in numerous studies of
the Sumerian tablets and other ancient scriptures. But there is one story in
the Bible which in my humble opinion supersedes all the others in
presenting evidence of god’s manipulation of humanity. This is the story
of Abraham, his son Isaac and Sodom and Gomorrah. It reads like a plot
from a Hollywood mafia movie, where certain people are set up to have
their loyalty tested, before they can be trusted by the ‘godfather’ to
perform certain acts which are not necessarily always kosher. Ask any
writer and they will confirm that the plot laid out in this particular story
of the Bible has the perfect structure for a screen play, which includes a
‘good-cop-bad-cop’ situation, planting seeds of suspicion and distrust,
while demanding absolute loyalty: a code of silence and obedience. These
events are perfect examples of a ‘master-slave’ relationship, with a
constant undertone of possible violence to be inflicted on the slave if he
should step out of line. It has perfectly crafted moments of transparent
leniency and hints of empty compassion towards the slaves who are
perpetually filled with mortal fear.
It all starts with the ‘god-master’ setting up his slave for personal
conflict by evicting his mistress. The slave is Abraham, the mistress is
Hagar. Abraham’s wife Sarah supports this move as Hagar is a real threat
to her because Hagar had given birth to a son of Abraham, who will
become a competitor to her own son in time to come. But the clever twist
lies in that the god-master tells Abraham to evict Hagar personally. By
doing this, the master tests his slave’s loyalty and he drives a wedge
between him and the mistress. No sooner has Hagar been left to die in the
unforgiving desert, than the god-master comes to the rescue of the
evicted young slave girl and her newborn son, winning her undivided
loyalty, spreading the word of the loving, benevolent god.
Genesis 21: 8 -21. Hagar and Ishmael Sent Away:
“The child grew and was weaned, and on the day Isaac was weaned
Abraham held a great feast. But Sarah saw that the son whom Hagarthe Egyptian had borne to Abraham was mocking, and she said to
Abraham, ‘Get rid of that slave woman and her son, for that slave
woman's son will never share in the inheritance with my son Isaac.’
The matter distressed Abraham greatly because it concerned his son.
But God said to him, ‘Do not be so distressed about the boy and your
maidservant. Listen to whatever Sarah tells you, because it is
through Isaac that your offspring will be reckoned. I will make the
son of the maidservant into a nation also, because he is your
offspring.’ Early the next morning Abraham took some food and a
skin of water and gave them to Hagar. He set them on her shoulders
and then sent her off with the boy. She went on her way and
wandered in the desert of Beersheba. When the water in the skin was
gone, she put the boy under one of the bushes. Then she went off and
sat down nearby, about a bowshot away, for she thought, ‘I cannot
watch the boy die.’ And as she sat there nearby, she began to sob.
God heard the boy crying, and the angel of God called to Hagar from
heaven and said to her, ‘What is the matter, Hagar? Do not be afraid;
God has heard the boy crying as he lies there. Lift the boy up and
take him by the hand, for I will make him into a great nation.’ Then
God opened her eyes and she saw a well of water. So she went and
filled the skin with water and gave the boy a drink. God was with the
boy as he grew up. He lived in the desert and became an archer.
While he was living in the Desert of Paran, his mother got a wife for
him from Egypt.”
This clever manipulation showed the gods that Abraham was extremely
loyal and trustworthy of performing future tasks. It also made Hagar
eternally indebted to god for saving her and her son’s lives. But what
future tasks do the gods have in mind for Abraham you might ask?
Possibly the earliest recorded examples of espionage in human history.
This was however not enough of a test of obedience for the future top spy
of the gods. Before they could entrust Abraham with a full army of well
equipped men, chariots, advanced weapons, large stretches of land and
wealth beyond belief, they had to devise a test of ultimate obedience,which they did. The story is famous even outside of Judeo-Christian
circles. Abraham is ordered by god to take his son Isaac onto a distant
mountain and sacrifice him to the gods. Their premeditated
maliciousness is evident in that they told Abraham to ‘go to a distant
mountain’, where they would be alone, so that nobody would witness the
brutal event as well as a premeditated murder. Who knows, something
may have gone wrong and Abraham may have killed Isaac on the
mountain that day. It was better that there were no witnesses around, or
confused relatives, to add to the growing discontent among the humans
towards the gods. Abraham passed the test with flying colours. He was
now ready to perform any task for the conniving gods. From this moment
on, the gods made sure that everyone knew about their favourite boy,
Abraham. Many tribal heads, kings and even priests came to seek his
favour, and in truth suck up to him to avoid any possible acts of
vengeance from the gods.
Genesis 22: 1 -18. The Sacrifice of Isaac by Abraham:
“Now it came about after these things, that God tested Abraham, and
said to him, ‘Abraham!’ And he said, ‘Here I am.’ He said, ‘Take
now your son, your only son, whom you love, Isaac, and go to the
land of Moriah, and offer him there as a burnt offering on one of the
mountains of which I will tell you.’ So Abraham rose early in the
morning and saddled his donkey, and took two of his young men
with him and Isaac his son; and he split wood for the burnt offering,
and arose and went to the place of which God had told him. On the
third day Abraham raised his eyes and saw the place from a distance.
Abraham said to his young men, ‘Stay here with the donkey, and I
and the lad will go over there; and we will worship and return to
you.’ Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering and laid it on
Isaac his son, and he took in his hand the fire and the knife. So the
two of them walked on together. Isaac spoke to Abraham his father
and said, ‘My father!’ And he said, ‘Here I am, my son.’ And he
said, ‘Behold, the fire and the wood, but where is the lamb for the
burnt offering?’Abraham said, ‘God will provide for Himself the lamb for the burnt
offering, my son.’ So the two of them walked on together. Then they
came to the place of which God had told him; and Abraham built the
altar there and arranged the wood, and bound his son Isaac and laid
him on the altar, on top of the wood. Abraham stretched out his hand
and took the knife to slay his son. But the angel of the LORD called
to him from heaven and said, ‘Abraham, Abraham!’ And he said,
‘Here I am.’ He said, ‘Do not stretch out your hand against the lad,
and do nothing to him; for now I know that you fear God, since you
have not withheld your son, your only son, from Me.’
Then Abraham raised his eyes and looked, and behold, behind him a
ram caught in the thicket by his horns; and Abraham went and took
the ram and offered him up for a burnt offering in the place of his
son. Abraham called the name of that place The LORD Will Provide,
as it is said to this day, ‘In the mount of the LORD it will be
provided.’ Then the angel of the LORD called to Abraham a second
time from heaven, and said, ‘By Myself I have sworn, declares the
LORD, because you have done this thing and have not withheld your
son, your only son, indeed I will greatly bless you, and I will greatly
multiply your seed as the stars of the heavens and as the sand which
is on the seashore; and your seed shall possess the gate of their
enemies. In your seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed,
because you have obeyed My voice.’”
This is surely the most malicious manipulation of early man by the gods
to establish his loyalty. It also provided a model for the gods with which
they could exercise future control over their human subjects, while
promising their loyal and obedient humans rich rewards. You have to see
through all the grandstanding, posturing and impressive narrative in the
Old Testament, to recognise the absolute fear under which the people
lived at all times. The gods were bloodthirsty and ruthless manipulators.
But they had a very good reason to behave this way: man had grown
visibly unhappy with their abuse, and man was beginning to form groups
of resistance, which were led by rebellious gods like Marduk, the son ofEnki.
At this point, building up to the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah,
Marduk had officially revolted against his commanding god Enlil,
developing a huge global following among humans, as he promised them
life after death. He also proclaimed himself as ‘god above all’. People
who were thought to be in any way involved in such activity against the
ruling gods, would be classified as vile and evil, committing unspeakable
acts of sin against god, and they would be punished severely. It is not
quite clear whether it was Enlil who committed the gruesome acts of
violence against humans, but the evidence seems to point towards
Marduk, as he grew more and more desperate to take control of the world.
Marduk devised his own plan to control his human worshippers with fear
and intimidation. After all, it had worked perfectly well until then. His
‘recruitment campaign’ began shortly before the rise of the Egyptian
empire and lasted way beyond the events at Sodom. Marduk travelled the
whole world, wherever other gods had settled, proclaiming himself as
‘god above all’. It worked especially well in the biblical lands including
Egypt, where the origins of the Bible are set. And so began the calculated
recorded manipulation of Humankind by the so-called ‘god of vengeance’
of the Old Testament.
Compare this behaviour to that of some notorious dictators many years
later like Stalin, Mao and Hitler and you will see there is not much
difference. ‘Like father, like son.’ The gods have taught us well and their
inherited DNA is clearly visible in our actions even today. We will see
some support for this in a few choice extracts from the Bible.
Meanwhile, the early activists against Enlil would congregate in places
where they would not be easily spotted by potential gossipers and spies.
The resistance kept on growing among the humans, and activists were
plotting various ways to overcome the brutal gods. It is also clear that
certain towns and cities became strongholds of the early revolutionaries,
possibly inspired by the very early ‘thinkers’ among humans, or the
philosophers who became so highly admired in latter days. Two such
cities were Sodom and Gomorrah.
So while Enlil was nurturing Abraham into a loyal general, other kingssaw that the instability among humans was on the rise and realised that
there was serious trouble brewing. It must have been common knowledge
that humans were growing increasingly unhappy with their gods and the
resistance was gaining momentum. Abraham and his followers were
constantly manipulated and brainwashed by the gods with stories that the
world was full of ‘sinful and evil’ people. Do me a favour!… How is this
possible? How was it possible that suddenly it was only Abraham and his
clan who were okay in god's eyes while mostly everyone else was evil,
involved in unacceptably sinful behaviour which meant that they had to
be destroyed? Ask yourself again… what could those people have been
doing that was so evil? What could they have been scheming that meant
the total annihilation of two entire cities? Did the almighty and loving
god not have other means at his disposal? Just imagine this kind of
behaviour today. Even in outright war situations, the aggressor usually
never obliterates entire cities. The humanitarian element elects not to
harm innocent women and children. It is mainly the soldiers who are
targets in war situations. I must rush to add that although this kind of
annihilation is pretty much what George W. Bush did in Afghanistan and
Iraq, there were however many survivors. The kind of annihilation that
describes the events at Sodom and Gomorrah, was much more malicious,
with a clear intent to kill all living things in those two cities.
Abraham must have become a highly dubious person in the lands
through which he moved, so much so, that even kings started to suck up
to him in anticipation of the gods' possible retaliation against them. But
his unshakable loyalty to his gods brought Abraham rich rewards of all
sorts and made him a very wealthy man. His nephew Lot was an active
participant in all of this and played a crucial role in delivering
information to Abraham, which would in turn be conveyed to the gods
and ‘angels’ when they came calling and snooping around for
information.
Genesis 13:2-15
“Now Abram was very rich in livestock, in silver, and in gold. And
he journeyed on from the Negeb as far as Bethel to the place wherehis tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Ai, to the
place where he had made an altar at the first. And there Abram
called upon the name of the LORD. And Lot, who went with Abram,
also had flocks and herds and tents, so that the land could not
support both of them dwelling together; for their possessions were
so great that they could not dwell together… ‘Is not the whole land
before you? Separate yourself from me. If you take the left hand,
then I will go to the right, or if you take the right hand, then I will go
to the left.’ And Lot lifted up his eyes and saw that the Jordan Valley
was well watered everywhere like the garden of the LORD, like the
land of Egypt, in the direction of Zoar (This was before the LORD
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah.). So Lot chose for himself all the
Jordan Valley, and Lot journeyed east. Thus they separated from
each other. Abram settled in the land of Canaan, while Lot settled
among the cities of the valley and moved his tent as far as Sodom.
Now the men of Sodom were wicked, great sinners against the
LORD.”
This was a cunning plan by the gods, to send Lot right into the heart of
Sodom and settle down there, while providing his uncle with information
about the growing movement of the resistance by the so-called ‘vile and
wicked’ humans. Then the gods once again reminded Abraham what his
reward would be if he did not disappoint them.
“The LORD said to Abram, after Lot had separated from him, ‘Lift up
your eyes and look from the place where you are, northward and
southward and eastward and westward, for all the land that you see I will
give to you and to your offspring forever...’”
To illustrate how nervous the kings in the surrounding lands must have
been of Abraham, here is an extract where one such king tries to secure
his future with Abraham, the ‘blue-eyed’ boy of the gods, by doing what
politicians have been doing forever, sucking up to the guys with money
and power:
Genesis 13:22-26. ACovenant with Abimelech:
“And it came to pass at that time that Abimelech and Phichol, thecommander of his army, spoke to Abraham, saying, ‘God is with you
in all that you do. Now therefore, swear to me by God that you will
not deal falsely with me, with my offspring, or with my posterity;
but that according to the kindness that I have done to you, you will
do to me and to the land in which you have dwelt.’ And Abraham
said, ‘I will swear.’”
Even at this point, while reassuring Abimelech that he would put a good
word in for him, he starts to display the subtle signs of a snitch for the
gods by reprimanding the king, and in the process demonstrating his
superiority:
“Then Abraham rebuked Abimelech because of a well of water
which Abimelech's servants had seized. And Abimelech said, ‘I do
not know who has done this thing; you did not tell me, nor had I
heard of it until today.’”
The poor king immediately tries to save his skin and eventually succeeds
according to the scripture. Another example of kings sucking up to
Abraham in fear, looking for favouritism, is the following exert from
Genesis 14:17-20:
Abram Blessed by Melchizedek:
“After his return from the defeat of Chedorlaomer and the kings who
were with him, the king of Sodom went out to meet him at the
Valley of Shaveh (that is, the King's Valley). And Melchizedek king
of Salem brought out bread and wine. (He was priest of God Most
High.) And he blessed him and said, ‘Blessed be Abram by God
Most High, Possessor of heaven and earth; and blessed be God Most
High, who has delivered your enemies into your hand!’”
It is painfully clear that everyone was very nervous of the tenuous
situation in the land, expecting something major to happen at any minute.
There was much activity with gods coming and going all the time,
appearing to various people, giving instructions and inflicting harm to
potential enemies. And on the ground there must have been much activity
among the revolutionaries, which we can tell from the constant references
in the Bible to the “evil and vile and sinful” men everywhere. There is adistinct paranoia in the tone with which the accusations keep recurring.
The people and the kings of the lands also knew Abraham’s close
relationship with the brutal gods, while the manipulation of Abraham
continued.
Genesis 15:
“God's Covenant with Abram states: ‘After these things the word of
the LORD came to Abram in a vision: Fear not, Abram, I am your
shield; your reward shall be very great.’”
But all this activity was just a build-up for the biggest event of them all,
when the gods maliciously planned and executed a full onslaught on
Sodom and Gomorrah, the safe haven of the revolutionaries under the
influence of Marduk, the rebellious god among the Anunnaki. Their slave
Abraham had become a devoted and loyal servant who would do anything
for his gods. God told Abraham that “the outcry against Sodom and
Gomorrah was great and the accusations against them were grievous”.
Then god said he had decided to “come down and verify” and if it was so,
he would destroy them completely. What basically transpired here is: The
gods instructed Abraham to go to the cities and spy on the people.
Obviously the Bible describes the action very differently, and Abraham is
seen to be sent on a mission from god, to identify any virtuous people
who may live in those cities, said to be crawling with evil and vile
sinners. And as history books are always written by the victors, we know
very little about the people of Sodom and Gomorrah, besides what the
propaganda passages of the Bible declare. After all, the events were
recorded by the victors who were grossly indoctrinated by the
manipulative gods.
Back with Abraham: Three ‘angels’ appeared to him. He raised his
eyes and behold, there were three men with him. Isn't this bloody
marvellous! These snoopy ‘angels’ always seem to appear when there is
trouble brewing, or just before the shit is about to hit the fan. Abraham
obviously recognised them immediately because he bowed his head and
pleaded with them. One can clearly see the fearful ‘slave and servant’
mentality in this passage. Two of them were ‘angels’ who must havecarried some sort of weapons which they used later to protect themselves,
and believe it or not, the third one was 'god' himself in person, telling
Abraham what must happen. The Old Testament called the angels
‘malachim’ which literally translates as ‘emissaries who carry divine
commands and messages from god’. They made it very clear to Abraham
that unless he can produce 50 virtuous men, from the inhabitants of the
two cities, the cities will be decimated. This is what really puzzles me
and what drives my theory that Abraham was weaned to be a spy for
them. Why should they tell Abraham this? Why should he be the one to
produce 50 righteous men to save the cities? It could only be because he
was asked to snoop around and report back to the gods. They have now
come to seek the results of his snooping.
At first Abraham showed a hint of a humanity and pleaded with the
gods not to kill everyone, for there may be ‘some virtuous or obedient’
people there. God seems to agree with this sentiment and promises not to
kill everyone as long as Abraham can find “even one” virtuous person in
all of those cities. What is happening here is clearly a setup for failure.
The gods have a non-negotiable plan to wipe out these rebels in these
‘sinful’ cities and Abraham is their spy. The other curious event is that
Abraham's nephew Lot, actually moved into Sodom prior to this and it is
probably he who was leaking information about the ‘evil sinful people’ of
the city, to his uncle.
So when the ‘angel warriors’ arrived at the city gate they found Lot
waiting for them. This is another little curiosity pointing to
premeditation. He took them to his house where they washed and ate, but
the word spread like fire through Sodom that the violent angels were at
Lot’s house, coming to attack them. Once again it is evident that the
residents of Sodom recognised the two ‘angels’ immediately. Could it be
because they had been seen doing this before? Just another one of their
regular appearances during which they inflicted pain and death on the
people? Or was it because they were dressed differently, which included
carrying deadly weapons, way beyond the humans’ understanding?
Clearly this was a perfect opportunity for the people of Sodom to lynch
the angels and have some level of revenge, even though it would havebeen on a small scale. Pandemonium broke out as the activists were
joined by young and old, demanding that the angels come out. There must
have been a lot of heated commotion and adrenalin flowing because this
type of situation did not present itself often. This was the perfect trigger
for the violent gods to react. It was all the proof they needed to confirm
that all the people of Sodom were indeed evil sinners who needed to be
destroyed. The angels came out and “smote the people with blindness, so
they could not see”. Then they told Lot to gather all his family members
and get out of the city as they were about to destroy it. Lot did his best to
round them up but he was met with disbelief and ridicule. In the end it
was only his wife and two daughters who fled the city with him, under
cover of darkness.
The following is the most amazing revelation of awesome weaponry
and deadly force that the ‘angels’ possessed. The ‘angels’ told Lot,
“Escape for thy life, look not behind thee, neither stop thou anywhere in
the plain… unto the mountains escape lest thou perish.” Basically
meaning, get the hell out of here… get to the mountains and hide in the
caves… well out of sight! Then the most remarkable thing happened. Lot
pleaded with them to delay the destruction of Sodom long enough for him
to reach the town of Zoar, which seemed to be far enough from Sodom.
The ‘angels of death’ urged Lot to hurry for they could not unleash their
deadly weapons until he arrived there safely. The description which
follows in the Bible can only be compared to a nuclear holocaust. And so
it must have been. The cities, the people, the vegetation; everything was
‘upheavaled’ by the power of the angels’ awesome weapons. The heat and
fire scorched everything in its path. Its radiation and pressure wave
affected people some distance away.
Why was Lot told not to look back and to hide out of sight? An
explosion of such magnitude would certainly blind one as quickly as a
million welding torches would, while the radiation with the pressure
wave and the heat would incinerate life for miles away. This is exactly
what happened to the disobedient and inquisitive wife of Lot. The
explosions behind them must have been the most spectacular and
frightening thing they had ever heard. She must have turned back fromsheer inquisitiveness to see the destruction… this was not a wise move.
The biblical Hebrew version relays that she was turned into “a pillar of
salt”. But as Zecharia Sitchin points out, it was incorrectly translated –
the proper translation should be ‘a pillar of vapour’. That is pretty much
what one would expect from a nuclear blast.
The destruction by the violent angels did not stop there. Once again we
find evidence that Lot may have been spying on other people in other
cities, as he made his way from one to the other, but for some reason he
was not allowed to stay. Could this be because the citizens were familiar
with Lot and his close links to the gods? Could it be that they simply did
not want Lot around? Were they scared of a similar fate to that of
Sodom? The angels of death followed Lot from town to town, destroying
them one by one in the same fashion as Sodom. I ask you to evaluate the
situation again. What on Earth were the people of those cities accused of
to deserve such severe punishment from our ‘ever-loving’ god? I will not
settle for the schizophrenic story portrayed in the Bible, even if you do
threaten me with nuclear weapons! This is not my God behaving in such a
distinctly barbaric way. The anger of the innocent people throughout the
lands must have boiled over, which only fuelled the revolutionaries,
causing thousands more to join the loud protests against the violent gods
everywhere. The angels had no need to look for troublemakers, the cities
must have risen up in rebellion against them one by one. The gods simply
responded with what they knew best – violence, death and destruction of
their disobedient slaves.
What all this activity points to is my underlying theory that much of
this violent global activity has everything to do with our human DNA,
which we inherited from our godly makers, and the evolution thereof. As
this human drama unfolds, I am changing my opinion rapidly about the
state of evolution of the Anunnaki. The evidence is mounting rapidly that
they were probably not much more evolved than we are today. If you look
at some of the human rights hurdles we have crossed in the past few
decades on Earth, it certainly seems that we may have already surpassed
their level of evolution on human rights issues. I make this statement in
the light that we have successfully passed a United Nations law againstslavery, while the Anunnaki created an entirely new slave species some
200,000 years ago. What has bothered me about this whole chain of
events is their lack of vision and their seeming ignorance of the
repercussions. At first, I believed the Anunnaki to have had perfect
genomes which allowed them to perform superhuman activities, live
forever and perform amazing genetic manipulations. But then I look at
how we have advanced in genetic engineering and cloning, and I realise
that we have the same capability today, as they had when they arrived on
Earth some 450,000 years ago. In many ways, we humans, the miserable
‘slave species’ of the gods, are at a similar level in space travel as the
Anunnaki were all those years ago, and before long we WILL be
colonising Mars. Ask yourself this question. Will our ‘human rights
charter’ allow the pioneers on Mars to clone a new sub-species of humans
as a lowly worker, with fewer rights than the astronaut settlers? Or will
the Mars settlers be allowed to clone a slave species to do all the dirty
work, and to be treated as lesser humans? I don't think so. But while we
display high levels of sensitivity towards human rights today, our violent
genes are still causing havoc among humanity. On that front we have a
long way to evolve or to possibly treat this violent imperfection with
genetic manipulation in the future.
This brings me back to the issue of how evolved the Anunnaki genome
might have been when they created us. It is now very clear that their
intentions were to create a less intelligent humanoid; one who is smart
enough to take instructions, but at the same time ignorant and subservient
enough not to challenge his maker. To achieve this they realised that
cloning their own species was not going to do the trick, as it would give
the offspring an equal genetic capacity to themselves. The obvious
answer to the problem was to cross their own more evolved DNA with
that of the Homo erectus, a resident species here on Earth. Although the
Anunnaki did possess enough knowledge of genetics to clone a number of
possible beings, it's much clearer now, that they probably also had to
switch off or disconnect some of the important genes in the proposed
slave species, in order to prevent certain advanced characteristics.
Sitchin's translations of Sumerian tablets tell us in great detail about howthey tried and tried again to get the egg to fertilise in the surrogate
females and allow the clone to grow into a healthy baby. They describe
the Homo erectus as “Among the animals on the steppe they live, they
know not dressing in garments… Shaggy with hair is their whole body…
No creature like that has ever in Edin been seen.” Then they tell us
exactly what the purpose of the new creature will be: “A primitive worker
shall be created… Our commands will he understand… Our tools he will
handle… The toil in the excavations he shall perform.” There are a
number of lamentations about their despair as they failed on several
attempts to create the ‘primitive worker’. “We must try once more… The
admixture needs adjusting… In the crystal bowl the oval of an earth
female she inseminated… There was conception… This one more in the
likeness of the Anunnaki was.” But their attempts failed on many
occasions before they created the perfect species. “Again and again
Ninmah rearranged the admixtures” and finally, the result was ‘almost’
perfect. The birth of ‘Adamu’ was met with great excitement by the
Anunnaki, but soon they would face many new unexpected problems. The
main hurdle they needed to cross then, was to tame the wild animal
behaviour of the new slave species, which naturally caused them to rebel
against any kind of confinement or oppression. The other hurdle was to
instil a sense of loyalty, subservience, obedience and especially fear, into
the new slave species. And so we meet the vengeful, bloodthirsty, strict
‘creator-god’ of humanity. He dishes out a code of strict instructions, and
he rewards obedience with gifts and leniency, while dispensing harsh pain
and suffering to those who disobey his word. While it may sound
unbelievable, it was virtually a foolproof plan. The kind of plan any
dictator would be proud of. Just look at how fearful we still are of the god
of vengeance. I will leave the rest of this story of creation for a later
chapter while we return to the concept of slavery and how free we think
we really are in the 21st century.
As always, just when you think you know it all, a new door opens to
reveal just how little you really know. When I started researching the
global history of slavery, I uncovered spine-chilling tales of hardship andmisery of such proportion, and stories so unbelievable, that it could make
one lose complete faith in humanity. But then I reminded myself of the
very simple idea that I am trying to share with you in this book. So let me
remind you once again, before I share some of the horrors of modern day
slavery with you… we were created as a slave species… we are still a
slave species… displaying all the behavioural characteristics of a slave
species. There is simply no getting away from the overwhelming
evidence surrounding us and filling the pages of our pre-history. It is
interesting to compare the ‘slave rules’ in the code of law by King
Hammurabi from Babylon, some 4,100 years ago, to the plight of
sweatshop workers in Chinese factories today. To get the real effect of
these modern sweatshops, let me remind you that many of the world’s
largest consumer brands are now manufactured in China under
despicable, inhumane conditions. These are the new slave markets of the
modern civilised world. Even though these factories have received loads
of publicity exposing them for violating human rights in ways that we
cannot even imagine, all the flag-waving, banner-bearing and chanting
liberals in the West keep buying the products that come from these
eastern slave markets. What they cannot see, does not affect them, so the
gluttonous consumers of the West will continue to consume in ever-
growing numbers, propagating the growth of the invisible slave trade of
the East. The USA and Europe are clearly the main culprits by virtue of
the sheer numbers in the so-called First World countries, while the Asian
market just carries on consuming the brands which enslave their
relatives. So now that I got that off my chest, let's take a look at a
Chinese sweatshop worker's lament, together with a few more nasty
revelations about our humanity:
THE CREATION OF ADAMA representation of a Mesopotamian cylinder seal showing the
creation of Adam, the first test-tube baby. We see a goddess holding
Adam while the others in the laboratory are preparing the DNA
mixture and holding up a test-tube of sorts. Notice the Tree-of-Life
prominently displayed behind the goddess.
SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES, often called ‘FINE
ZONES’.
One popular method of enslaving workers is the system of imposing
fines.
SIDE
Yellow lines are marked on the floor; if workers step
TRACKING: outside the yellow lines, they are fined.
Most factories fix a time limit for going to the toilet,
OVERTIME: usually 3-5 minutes. If they stay longer than the limit,
they will be fined.
GOING TO In some factories, workers have to get a permit tag from
THE TOILET the supervisor to go to the toilet. The problem is that
WITHOUT
there are usually only a few tags for large numbers of
PERMIT:
workers, mostly women.
Over and above these, there are many other ‘creative’ excuses used to
impose fines, such as ‘not willing to work overtime’ and ‘not greeting the
general manager’. The high wages promised to workers in these ‘fine
zone factories’ are mostly eroded to one-third or even less by all the fines
imposed. In extreme cases, workers end up in debt to the factory by the
end of the month.It is said that the Matsushita (National/Panasonic) Co. Ltd. in Zhuhai
City, has the following warning system of yellow cards. First yellow card
is a fine of Rmb 20, the second card Rmb 40, the third time, Rmb 80 and
the fourth time they receive a yellow card they are fired. Reasons for
receiving a yellow card include basic acts such as talking at work, not
putting their name tags in the correct position, etc.
I ask you again. How is this possible? How did primitive man suddenly
come up with the concept of slavery? And how can modern man try to
justify the continued use of forced labour still today? We can now draw a
very clear line in human history and find a point when slavery first
emerged. As amazing as it may seem, slavery amongst humans emerged
at the same time as the sudden ‘civilisation’ around 11,000 BC. Soon
after the deluge, the Great Flood, Humankind began to enslave each
other, doing what they were born into, and what seemed to come quite
naturally.
Many will argue that we have not evolved at all since then, that we
have actually gone backwards. I must agree to a certain extent that dark
oppressive cults and religious dogma are of great concern, and are in
some ways retarding our spiritual progress. But there is increasing
excitement among the global populace about new discoveries, inventions,
space travel and more basic events like the emancipation of various
peoples from dictators. Let me remind you that it was only in 1930 that
we discovered the planet Pluto, and yet today we have two robots on Mars
beaming back visual messages to us. We have certainly evolved, there is
no doubt about that. What needs to be established is how much our
genome has evolved. If the past 100 years is a form of measure we could
use, that would mean the pace of evolution among humans is most likely
exponential. The more we evolve, the faster we evolve. And yet it is only
the wealthy sectors of world population which seem to be evolving in this
way. One can argue that it is mere progress and not real evolution. But
conversely, progress could lead us to fast-track our evolution through
knowledge of our DNA. The pace of space exploration and IT
development would certainly support such a theory. So if my assumptionabout the level of evolution is correct, it would mean that the Anunnaki
would have evolved way past us at this stage, possibly to the point where
we wouldn’t even recognise them. Unless of course, we possess some
unique mutation in our genome which would have catapulted us beyond
their level of evolution. And by now we should have learnt that
everything is possible, so let us not discard that theory as yet. The very
sad thing is that while one fifth of the world's population revels in
progress, the majority are trapped by poverty, hunger, disease and even
slavery.
News article December 2004
“Around 200,000 women were forced into sexual slavery by Japan's
military during the Second World War, when they shipped these
women from Korea, China and other Asian countries to be kept as
sex slaves for Japanese troops. It was only during the early '90s that
Tokyo acknowledged its military had been involved in setting up and
running brothels for its troops. However, high court judge Makoto
Nemoto said the current administration did not have to pay
compensation because it was not responsible for what past leaders
had done. In past rulings, courts have favoured the Japanese
government, stating that the statute of limitations had expired, or
that international labour rules did not require compensation for
sexual slavery.”
Slave labour in China seems to be on the increase according to news
reports dated August 2001. Young Chinese men are increasingly
becoming victims of forced labour as economic necessity forces them to
migrate to other provinces, where they have been promised well-paid jobs
in brick factories or stone quarries. An article by Bruce Gilley published
in the Far Eastern Economic Review on 16 August 2001, highlighted how
27 men were forced to work as slaves for 12 hours a day with no pay in a
brick factory in Dingzhou, China. One of the men who tried to escape was
caught, dragged back to the camp and beaten to death in front of the other
men. It was only on 22 May 2001, after one worker managed to escape
from the guards, that local labour officials were informed and arrived toarrest the manager and free the men. The workers had been enslaved there
for more than one year.
In February 2001, a newspaper called Dahe Daily reported that
officials in Zhengzhou, Henan province, tried to free 30 slaves from an
illegal coal pit. They were turned away by 20 armed guards and had to
return the next day with armed police. Another coal pit was closed in the
same area which enslaved six labourers, whose ages ranged between 14
and 73.
In May 2001, five women, who were being forced to work without pay
at an industrial materials polishing factory, escaped during an electricity
blackout, according to a report in the Yanshan Metropolis News.
China has a household registration system called ‘hokou’ which gives
workers very few rights or protection when they leave their designated
place of residence. This encourages others to view migrants as second
class citizens. The attitude taken by local authorities is that ‘it's not our
people so we're not responsible for them’. In one reported case, 100
people from Henan were rescued from a kelp factory in Shandong's
Rongcheng city, only after one of them managed to contact family in
Henan, after which they contacted the local newspaper, the Henan Daily.
A manager of a brick factory in Dingzhou, admitted to keeping “several”
workers against their will. While laws exist to prohibit forced labour,
government officials and labour officials often do not seem to enforce
them.
As much as economic necessity plays a role in making migrants
vulnerable to being trapped as forced labourers, it is mainly the
corruption and greed of humans which allows slavery to flourish. The
greed gene and the violent gene are as strong as ever in our genome. Why
is it that some have developed mechanisms to suppress these
characteristics, while others thrive on the effects of these genes? By the
end of 1994, there were a total of 260,000 officially-registered FIE
(Foreign Invested Entities) enterprises in China, employing around 1.95
million workers, with total investment amounting to US $491 billion.
Because they are afforded preferential treatment by the government, FIEs
in China are immune to any monitoring. The trend is that governmentofficials and departments turn a blind eye to law-defying FIEs for fear of
losing investment. In return, the FIEs have identified this loophole as a
psychological advantage and use it as a threat against law-enforcement
departments. FIEs comprised at least 40% of all labour dispute cases in
1994. Some other tricks used by FIEs are:
1. Workers are required to pay a deposit upon recruitment, which
usually adds up to two to three months' salary. They cannot claim
back the deposit if they quit or get fired.
2. Workers' identity cards and temporary residence permits are
confiscated upon entry. Workers are virtually held in custody, since
they cannot go anywhere without their identity cards.
3. Workers get paid on average 18% less than the minimum wage. The
lowest wage level was found in Dongguan City, which paid 32.2%
less than the minimum wage.
4. Wage arrears and underpayment enslaves workers by not allowing
them to take any action on their own. Some receive their wages once
every few months and some enterprises only pay basic living
allowances. Invariably, when the enterprises wind up, the workers
cannot claim back their unpaid wages. In an official investigation
conducted in September 1994 in Guangdong Province, which was the
main area for foreign investment in China, 25,000 workers were
found to be underpaid or unpaid to the tune of Rmb 6.52 million
(one of the two official Chinese currencies).
Harsh management resembles slave treatment even in accredited
factories in the special economic zones. Many of the labourers come
from poverty-stricken villages. Physical and verbal abuse and arbitrary
dismissals are the rule of the day.
In March 1995, workers in a Korean electronics factory in Zhuhai City
were forced to work non-stop for four days with only five hours sleep.
The exhausted workers took a nap during the ten-minute afternoon rest
period. Angered by their ‘laziness’, the factory boss ordered the wholestaff to kneel down. When some refused to obey they were sacked
immediately. As China is being rapidly integrated into the world trade
system, workers in China are no longer slaves of the state, they are
becoming slaves of the state and of international capitalism.
The slave-labour-like factories, many of which produce big
international brands, have taken many lives due to fires in the past
decade. This kind of safety statistic would be completely unacceptable in
the UK or USA.
May 1991
Hong Kong-owned Xingye Raincoat Factory, producing Ninja Turtle
•
children's raincoats in Dongguan City, Guangdong Province; 72 killed,
47 injured.
November 1993
• Hong Kong-owned Zhili Toy Factory, producing Chicco Toys in
Shenzen SEZ; 87 killed, 51 injured.
December 1993
• Taiwanese Gaofu Textile Co. Ltd. in Fuzhou City, Fujian Province; 61
killed, all women.
June 1994
Hong Kong-owned Yuexin Textile Factory in Zhuhai SEZ; 93 killed,
•
160 injured. The workers were asked to go back to the burnt factory
building to take out the fabric just before the building collapsed.
September 1995
•
Electric wire factory in Dongguan City; 7 killed, 4 injured.
New Year's Day 1996
Workers' dormitory of a Taiwanese Christmas decoration factory in
• Shenzen SEZ; 22 killed, 33 injured. The warehouse-turned-dormitory
was built with corrugated iron. It housed more than 800 workers and
masses of plastic materials. The only exits were the two main doors.
All these preventable ‘accidents’ follow the same pattern. There are no
fire prevention facilities and emergency exits are normally blocked or
sealed to prevent the ‘slave’ labourers from getting out. In the first elevenmonths of 1995, there were 1,184 fires recorded in Guangdong Province,
claiming 193 lives and injuring 268. Most of the casualties involved
young women workers, who constitute the main workforce in foreign-
invested enterprises. Can you imagine this kind of news making the
headlines in Los Angeles? At first you may say “this kind of thing would
never happen in the USA”. But the truth is, that it probably happens all
the time, but it simply never makes the news. Why? Because the cheap
labour in LA consists of Mexican ‘illegal aliens’, which means it is not
juicy enough for the bloodthirsty media, who probably won’t pay any
attention to it. Mexican lives just seem to be worth a little less than
blonde-blue-eyed beach bunnies.
So here we are some 200,000 years after our entry into the universal
community of primitive species. Although we arrived as a slave species,
we have made remarkable progress against our hostile and vengeful
makers, who would stop at nothing to manipulate, control and punish us
at every conceivable opportunity. And only some 11,000 years since we
adopted civilisation, courtesy of some of the more benevolent gods, we
are about to colonise Mars. Now that we have the moral high ground on
our creator gods, with regard to our view on human rights and equality,
we still carry the violent hangover of our slave species character.
Although almost invisible, slavery is alive and well on Earth, as it has
been for thousands of years. Will we learn from our own experiences
when we settle on Mars, or will we do what comes so naturally to us -
clone a new slave species and control them with an iron fist. If our slowly
evolving DNA has any role in this, we will probably engage in the latter.
Code of Hammurabi Priest King who established Babylonia:
There is some disagreement about the date of Hammurabi's rule. Some
scholars put him at circa 2300 BC, others as late as 1700 BC. Zecharia
Sitchin places him at around 1900 BC, which would make Hammurabi
one of the first kings after the destruction of Sodom, Gomorrah and other
cities by the Anunnaki gods, in pursuit of Marduk the rebellious god and
son of Enki, circa 2024 BC. But as we will show, Marduk survived and
Babylon became a powerful city under his ‘godship’. In this translationby L. W. King we read what King Hammurabi had to say about his new
kingdom as bestowed upon him by Marduk:
“When Anu the Sublime, King of the Anunnaki, and Bel, the lord of
Heaven and earth, who decreed the fate of the land, assigned to
Marduk, the over ruling son of Ea, God of righteousness, dominion
over earthly man, and made him great among the Igigi, they called
Babylon by his illustrious name, made it great on earth, and founded
an everlasting kingdom in it, whose foundations are laid so solidly
as those of heaven and earth; then Anu and Bel called by name me,
Hammurabi, the exalted prince, who feared God, to bring about the
rule of righteousness in the land, to destroy the wicked and the evil-
doers; so that the strong should not harm the weak; so that I should
rule over the black-headed people like Shamash, and enlighten the
land, to further the well-being of mankind.”
These words are wonderful evidence of how the Anunnaki gods
controlled the fates of men and bestowed kingship on their chosen few.
We also find corroboration of the close relationship between Marduk and
the Igigi, who were his followers, who arrived on Earth from Mars when
it lost its atmosphere. They are the most likely candidates, who were the
progenitors of the Aryans when they married earthling females in years to
come. We also read about the “blackheaded people” who were the
‘primitive workers’ and descendents of ‘Adamu’ who were brought up to
Sumer to work for the upper-class Sumerians and gods. We also read
about the plight of the ‘blackheaded’ people in other tablets and we find
references to them mostly with regard to performing the hard labour for
which they were created. This proves irrefutably that black people have
had the raw end of the deal on this planet since the very first moment of
creation. It is now clear that Adam was black. Some of his descendents
were taken north and mixed with the Igigi and other lesser gods of Sumer,
creating the white Aryan upper class of the Sumerian civilisation. Those
relatives of Adam who remained in Africa, remained ‘behind’ in many
other ways. While the technology of the Anunnaki gods was being widely
applied in the daily lives of the Sumerians, the African descendents ofAdam were living in basic and primitive conditions for thousands of
years, worshipping their ‘mythological’ gods. But not all the
‘blackheaded’ people who were taken to Sumer had it easy, because most
of them remained slaves to the Anunnaki and experienced hardship. Some
2,000 years BC, an unknown scribe wrote a poem describing the sad
events which surrounded the fall of the city of Ur. In this lamentation we
read about the plight of the ‘blackheaded’ people. This poem is an
excellent corroboration of the aftermath during which Sodom and
Gomorrah were destroyed by some kind of nuclear disaster, unleashed by
the biblical ‘angels’ who visited Abraham and Lot. The time was around
2024 BC. The dots in the following translation of the tablet indicate the
damaged parts of the tablet which are illegible.
“That law and order cease to exist…
That cities be destroyed, that houses be destroyed…
That Sumer's rivers flow with bitter water…
That the mother care not for her children…
That kingship be carried off from the land…
That on the banks of the Tigris and Euphrates … there grow sticky
plants…
That no one tread the highways, that no one seek out the roads,
That its well-founded cities and hamlets be counted as ruins,
That its teeming blackheaded people be put to the mace…
The fate decreed by the gods cannot be changed, who can overturn it!”
Codes 15 -20 of ‘The Code of Hammurabi’ dealing with references to
slaves.
If any one take a male or female slave of the court, or a male or
15 female slave of a freed man, outside the city gates, he shall be put to
death.
If any one receive into his house a runaway male or female slave of
the court, or of a freed man, and does not bring it out at the public
16
proclamation of the major domus, the master of the house shall be put
to death.
If any one find runaway male or female slaves in the open country17 and bring them to their masters, the master of the slaves shall pay him
two shekels of silver.
If the slave will not give the name of the master, the finder shall bring
18 him to the palace; a further investigation must follow, and the slave
shall be returned to his master.
If he hold the slaves in his house, and they are caught there, he shall
19
be put to death.
If the slave that he caught run away from him, then shall he swear to
20
the owners of the slave, and he is free of all blame.
The Code of the Nesilim (Hittites), circa 1650-1500 BC -Random
excerpts.
If anyone smite a free man or woman and this one die, he shall bring
this one and give two persons, he shall let them go to his home.·If
•
anyone smite a male or female slave, he shall bring this one also and
give one person, he shall let him or her go to his home.
If anyone blind a free man or knock out his teeth, formerly they would
• give one pound of silver, now he shall give twenty half-shekels of
silver.
If anyone blind a male or female slave or knock out their teeth, he shall
give ten half- shekels of silver, he shall let it go to his home. If anyone
cause a free woman to miscarry, if it be the tenth month, he shall give
•
ten half-shekels of silver, if it be the fifth month, he shall give five
half-shekels of silver. If anyone cause a fe fmale slave to miscarry, if it
be the tenth month, he shall giveive half-shekels of silver.
If any man of Hatti steal a Nesian slave and lead him here to the land of
• Hatti, and his master discover him, he shall give him twelve half-
shekels of silver, he shall let it go to his home.
If anyone steal a slave of a Luwian from the land of Luwia, and lead
• him here to the land of Hatti, and his master discover him, he shall take
his slave only.
• If a male or female slave run away, he at whose hearth his master finds
him or her, shall give fifty half-shekels of silver a year.If a free man and a female slave be fond of each other and come
together and he take her for his wife and they set up house and get
• children, and afterward they either become hostile or come to close
quarters, and they divide the house between them, the man shall take
the children, only one child shall the woman take.
If a slave take a woman as his wife, their case is the same. The majority
of the children to the wife and one child to the slave. If a slave take a
female slave their case is the same. The majority of children to the
•
female slave and one child to the slave. If a slave convey the bride
price to a free son and take him as husband for his daughter, nobody
dare surrender him to slavery.
If a free man set a house ablaze, he shall build the house, again. And
• whatever is inside the house, be it a man, an ox, or a sheep that
perishes, nothing of these he need compensate.
If a slave set a house ablaze, his master shall compensate for him. The
• nose of the slave and his ears they shall cut off, and give him back to
his master. But if he do not compensate, then he shall give up this one.
If a free man kill a serpent and speak the name of another, he shall give
•
one pound of silver; if a slave, this one shall die.
If a free man pick up female slaves, now one, now another, there is no
punishment for intercourse. If brothers sleep with a free woman,
• together, or one after the other, there is no punishment. If father and
son sleep with a female slave or harlot, together, or one after the other,
there is no punishment.
If a slave say to his master: “You are not my master,” if they convict
•
him his master shall cut off his ear.
No matter how much evidence is presented, many readers will find the
truth too terrible to digest. Our human nature has evolved in a way that
we simply reject gloomy hypotheses of such magnitude in favour of
rosier tales told by historians. In this quest for enlightenment, our biggest
enemy is our arrogance. In our inability to face the ‘terrible truth’ about
our slave-species ancestry, lies the ironic paradox which may ultimatelycontribute to our demise. Our misplaced pride may eventually destroy us.
Knowledge is power, no matter how old it may be. I suggest that we begin
to embrace the knowledge of our distant ancestors, as difficult as it may
be, and find a way to understanding the real facts about our origins as the
human race and our place on this planet. Unfortunately, every ounce of
our human essence screams with the characteristics of a slave species
trapped in a cycle of incomprehensible rituals. Enslaved by everything
around us, but stubbornly rejecting such suggestions to our graves. We
were created as a slave species, we have lived and behaved like a slave
species and we are still behaving as such, uncertain of our origins and
purpose.