CHAPTER 14
Myths & Lies The living gods
I recall vividly the first day I discovered a story about prehistoric
mythological gods and their adventures. It sounded like the world's
greatest fairytale and yet it possessed some kind of mystery that made it
feel more real that any other story I had ever heard. The characters were
so well-defined that I could not help but imagine they were real. Flying
through the skies, crossing the world in a flash, causing the thunder and
rain and bringing love and fertility to people while somehow being
engaged in a perpetual battle for some righteous cause. It was mainly the
Greek gods, Roman gods and the Egyptian gods that I was so taken by.
Although I was told on many occasions that they were not real, and they
were merely imaginary deities who arose out of people's overactive
minds over thousands of years, I refused to believe that. I really wanted
to believe that these ancient gods were real. They were so majestic, all-
knowing, all-powerful with extravagant palaces all over the world in
secret places, where man could never set foot. The more I heard of these
stories, the more I wanted them to be real. What my motivation was I will
never know, but I suspect that it was really just the thought of touching
the untouchable. The goddesses always looked so sexy and even as a
young boy they had already appealed to me.
As far as I was concerned, these magnificent gods and goddesses lived in
a secret place in the world which was well hidden from humans, and that
they would keep it a great secret from us forever. I was so taken by these
gods that they consumed my teenage years and I wrote numerous songs
about them from Zeus, the all powerful; Venus, the sexy goddess of love
and every man's ultimate fantasy; Bacchus, Mercury, Thor, Apollo and
even the terrible Beelzebub. I wanted to immortalise these exciting
characters in my own way. In hindsight I find this rather strangebehaviour and it intrigues me why they made such an impression on me
and why I behaved in such a manner. As the years wore down my
impressionable qualities, I began to wonder what the possibilities were,
that maybe somewhere in the distant past such deities may have actually
existed on Earth, and that they may be more than just fantasy characters.
I'm sure that I am just one of many millions of screwed-up individuals
who have had such thoughts at some stage. But my history teachers were
steadfast in their pronouncement that they were most definitely just
imaginary characters of simple people who needed something to believe
in. Those simple, primitive people, folk from the distant past must have
had great imagination, I thought, saddened by the reality that modern
man no longer has such a vivid imagination… such detailed
imagination… such convincing imagination which can last for thousands
of years. But in the education system of the western world, which is
driven relentlessly by Judeo-Christian monotheistic beliefs, any teachers
who would carelessly admit to the possible existence of ancient gods
would be rapidly dismissed. That little part I did not know for some time.
The part that has firmly held our cultures and customs in a stranglehold
for 2,000 years. It started to dawn on me that people today are as fearful
of their god, as the ancient people were fearful of the multitude of gods
they prayed to. The only real difference was that the primitive people
could see their gods, while we modern humans with fantastic technology
cannot see our god. But this has not always been the case however,
because the forefathers of our great modern religions saw ‘god’ all the
time. That was such an exciting discovery for me – it had actually been
staring me in the face all the time. Of course… Adam, Noah, Abraham,
Moses, Ezekiel, Isaiah, David, and many other heroes of the Bible had
regular contact with ‘our’ god as he came down from the heavens to
converse with our forefathers and give them his commands. The only
god, the real god, the god of love, the most vengeful god, but also the
righteous god. So there it was, our god was also sexy, spectacular, flew
across the skies on clouds and chariots and lived in a magnificent palace
in the sky. We did not have to feel ashamed of our god in front of the
ancient Greeks, Romans and Egyptians.Then one day, a small technicality dawned on me. The fact that all the
great civilisations of the world have their own mythology filled with
magnificent gods. It made me wonder how they all seem to have heard
about these gods all over the world. A well informed 13-year-old friend
of mine promptly provided the answer. “People passed the stories down
from one generation to another for thousands of years and that is how
they spread all over the world,” he said convincingly. How stupid could I
be… of course! That is what people did, they told stories to their children
and the stories travelled around the world being told by mothers to their
children everywhere. That seemed like a very plausible solution to me
and I was happy for a while. But as the years went by and I started to
delve into more juicy literature, I suddenly wasn't so sure anymore. How
is it possible that every civilisation around the world had a similar set of
gods they prayed to? And the gods did not take thousands of years to
reach them, they suddenly appeared out of the blue, taking control of the
local humans' lives and destinies? Let me explain the logistical problem
to you. Even today, with international flight possible, with media
covering every corner of the world, people who travel to all parts of the
world carrying news and messages and cultural influences with them, it is
still extremely difficult to get a message across, which people will
accept, swallow and buy into. Even Richard Branson with his global
brands and global influence finds it difficult to launch a new idea like
Virgin Cola everywhere. People must be really impressed by something
to embrace it or they must be enticed to embrace it by the promise of
reward, or forced to embrace it by the threat of violence. It is therefore
very difficult to swallow modern-day explanations of how the primitive
people of the world all got to hear the stories about these fantastical gods.
What makes these assumptions even more silly is the problem of
antiquity, when the people of ancient times had no idea who lived 200
miles away from them, let alone 10,000 miles away, which included
7,000 miles of treacherous ocean. I trust you are starting to grasp the
problem. How could those amazing stories of majestic gods have
travelled such distances? And who was telling those stories to the people
11,000 years ago? And who actually created those stories? Did theyoriginate in the Near East, in Mesopotamia, in the Far Eastern lands of
China and Japan, or in the Americas where the Mayan and Inca
civilisations were blooming way back then. The stories could also have
originated in many other parts of the world, even among more remote
cultures like the Inuits, Khoi-San, Aboriginals, Maori… you see the
problem? Suddenly our spectacular mythological stories pose a real
challenge to us in tracing them back to their mythical origin. It just does
not seem to make any sense. The flood story is a great example of similar
tales which were told by many cultures scattered over the world. We have
explored some of those examples of similarity in a previous chapter. And
it gets even more confusing when we realise that all the ancient cultures
had very much the same group of gods they prayed to, they feared, they
made offerings to, they were protected by, they were punished by, and
gods whom they seemed to have regular contact with. If this sounds a
little strange, let me quickly remind you of Adam, Noah, Abraham,
Moses and other biblical legends who had exactly those kind of
experiences with their god constantly, throughout their lives. It was as if
the gods were controlling the people's lives on a daily basis in ancient
history. By this I mean all the people, including our biblical heroes. Is it
possible that the gods of the ancient Mesopotamians and Greeks were the
same gods of Noah and Abraham? The many descriptions in the Sumerian
tablets by kings and priests of their gods are very similar to the
descriptions by the biblical characters of god. Let me also ask my
question from the first chapter. Why has it been 2000 years since god has
actually physically appeared before someone of international stature, or
anyone else for that matter and had a conversation with them? Why is it
that the many appearances by angels and god himself, have come to a
stop? Is it because of our growing awareness and intelligence as a
species? And the development of audiovisual technology, which could
very easily expose the so-called angels as something very different?
The puzzle of the ancient gods is a crucial element in the quest for our
origins which needs to be answered, before we find more clarity on who
we are and where we come from. Let's face it, all the insipid explanations
of how the primitive people created these gods from their imaginationwhen they were bored thousands of years ago is simply not plausible and
it stinks of our modern-day arrogance. There are simply too many holes
and too many incredible coincidences. The most visible coincidence in
the mythological god question, is the simple fact that all the ancient
cultures had virtually exactly the same gods with the same hierarchy.
There is always the supreme god who in most cases is responsible for
creating the world; his sons and daughters; their offspring and their
offspring and so on. The amazing thing is, that in each case the god was
incredibly well-profiled. The people knew which aspects of their world
each god was responsible for, how the gods looked, what they wore, how
they travelled, in what kind of machine, whom they were married to, or
had kids with, what they liked and disliked, what offerings people should
make to them if the gods were angry, and when the people had sinned. In
most cases people even knew where the god actually lived. The one
overwhelming characteristic that all the gods seemed to share was their
potential for violence, strong-handedness, vengeance and punishment of
the humans. But the gods also rewarded their loyal servants for
performing good deeds, just like in the Bible. Those deeds were however
normally commands or very strongly worded ‘requests’ by the gods.
Genesis 13:14 -17.
“The LORD said to Abram after Lot had parted from him, ‘Lift up
your eyes from where you are and look north and south, east and
west. All the land that you see I will give to you and your offspring
forever. Go, walk through the length and breadth of the land, for I
am giving it to you.’”
There are many cases in the Bible where god rewards his servants, and
the so-called mythical gods were equally generous when they wanted to
be… only when they wanted something. There was always a hidden
agenda behind god's requests. People first had to do something, go
somewhere, perform some arduous task, before they received some form
of reward. The reward was more often than not, grandiose. There is just
too much detailed information in the relationship between the mythical
gods and the people of ancient times, to have been a figment of people’simagination. Much of the detail includes physical and material
interaction between man and god which in today's world would be
completely fantastical. The Greeks described their gods as
anthropomorphic, which means that they looked like humans in most
respects. They also displayed all the same human characteristics. They
were happy, angry, jealous, argued and fought, had likes and dislikes,
they loved sex and procreated like humans by creating offspring through
sexual intercourse. They were untouchable and unreachable and yet they
were constantly mixed up in human affairs. They travelled at high speeds
around the world, disappeared in a flash and arrived in an instant. They
each had specific functions and weapons of great destruction and unusual
power. People made ritual offerings to win their favour but they were
extremely unpredictable and could change their minds quickly, depending
on their mood.
The most compelling argument against the mythological god theory, is
that around 9,000 years BC shortly after the emergence of civilisation in
Sumer, the early forefathers of the great Mayan civilisation had also
popped up. What is totally mind-boggling is that they also knew all about
agriculture, planting and harvesting crops, domesticating animals, had
communal settlements like villages and cities where they displayed a
remarkable grasp for trade and commerce. They had their own currency,
they had seemingly endless supplies of gold, they also knew the process
of gold ore mining. The Mayan civilisation has baffled archaeologists for
the past 200 years, when the rape of the continent first subsided and
historical interest was raised, but even today there seems to be no clarity
regarding its actual origins, true age and relevance to the Sumerian
civilisation. Or is there? Ancient China had a god who actually lived
among the people and performed wondrous deeds for them. Does that
sound familiar? The parallels with Jesus are astounding. Kuan Ti was a
god of war. The ‘Great Judge’ who protected the people from injustice
and evil spirits. A red-faced god always dressed in green, he was also an
oracle. Kuan Ti was an actual historical figure, a general of the Han
dynasty, renowned for his skills as a warrior and his justness as a ruler.
There were more than 1,600 temples dedicated to Kuan Ti. This sounds alot more like the messiah for whom the Jews were waiting. A warrior
king to lead them out of slavery and defeat all their enemies.
The other fascinating coincidence is that most of the mythologies,
although thousands of miles and years apart, seemed to have a pantheon
of 12 main gods who commanded a whole host of other lesser gods, who
were mostly siblings or other relatives. This was one big family affair.
Why would it be kept in the family in such a fashion? Cast your mind
back to biblical events. There too, the heir to a father’s riches would be
the son of his half-sister and not the son of his wife. Abraham had an
episode like that and the Sumerian gods kept this pure bloodline ritual
going most of the time, except when it all got out of hand and the “Sons
of the gods saw the daughters of man and had children with them” as is
outlined in Genesis 6.
Genesis 6:1 - 8.
“When men began to increase in number on the earth and daughters
were born to them, the sons of God saw that the daughters of men
were beautiful, and they married any of them they chose. Then the
LORD said, ‘My Spirit will not contend with man forever, for he is
mortal; his days will be a hundred and twenty years.’ The Nephilim
were on the earth in those days and also afterward when the sons of
God went to the daughters of men and had children by them. They
were the heroes of old, men of renown. The LORD saw how great
man's wickedness on the earth had become, and that every
inclination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil all the time.
The LORD was grieved that he had made man on the earth, and his
heart was filled with pain. So the LORD said, ‘I will wipe mankind,
whom I have created, from the face of the earth men and animals,
and creatures that move along the ground, and birds of the air for I
am grieved that I have made them.’ But Noah found favour in the
eyes of the LORD.”
This passage is another perfect example of how the ruling gods did not
want their blood contaminated with the slave species. They needed to stay
pure to stay more powerful and in control, which was showing signs ofslipping. The slave species had found new wisdom and were no longer
prepared to be treated so badly. And now that the sons of the gods were
marrying mortal ‘slave women’, the offspring would have an advanced
genome, be more intelligent and live much longer. Already then, the gods
had decided that they would not “contend with man forever, and his days
on earth are numbered”, as is outlined in verse 3 above. They knew very
well of the impending cosmic gravitational effect which was going to
cause the Great Flood, when Nibiru came closer to the Sun. This would
take care of the human problem forever.
Let's take a look at the major ancient civilisations and their prominent
gods, to see how closely they resemble each other in description,
responsibility, behaviour and many other characteristics. Let us start with
the Sumerian gods, since they seem to be the oldest of the lot and
probably are the ‘originals’ upon which all the rest were modelled. We
can say this with confidence because the Sumerians actually recorded
their god's names in tablets called The Sumerian King Lists, with
genealogies and tales in great detail. This ancient tablet contains some
149 names of kings and gods dating back to before the flood and so far
there have not been any older discoveries made. Sumerian gods were the
predecessors for later Akkadian, Babylonian and Assyrian civilisations;
the same gods with different names. Sometimes the names differed very
slightly, as in AN and ANU. At first sight, the list of names looks like a
mish-mash of confusion, but on closer inspection we realise that they
were all related and that the nieces and nephews and grandsons were
allocated less important positions mostly in the smaller towns and
villages. They were probably no more than foot soldiers posted out in the
country to maintain a presence. Zecharia Sitchin points out that one such
example of a lesser god with no awesome weapons or powers or heroic
tales was NIN.KASHI. This goddess supervised the beverages and her
name literally meant ‘lady beer’. These lesser gods were referred to as
‘gods of Earth’.
Each of the important deities was the patron of one or more Sumerian
city and large temples were erected in the name of such deities, who were
worshipped as the divine ruler and protector of the city. Temple riteswere conducted by many priests, priestesses, singers, musicians, sacred
prostitutes, and eunuchs. The gods required that sacrifices were offered to
them daily, which was a clever way of staying in close contact with their
slave species and maintaining a subservient mentality among them. The
Sumerians believed that human beings were ‘fashioned out of clay’ just
like in many later cultures and religions, and were created for the purpose
of supplying the gods with food, drink, and shelter, so that the gods might
have full leisure for their divine activities.
Once you unravel the long list of names you end up with a pantheon of
powerful deities who ruled Earth with an iron fist. The Sumerians called
them ‘gods of Heaven and Earth’. These were the gods who struck fear
into mortals with their awesome weapons as they regularly moved
between heaven and Earth in their ‘boats of heaven’. They were
‘international’ gods who were active in various parts of the world where
they had established mining activities. It is therefore logical to assume
that because of their constant movement from place to place, the local
‘slave species’created their own localised stories about the ‘gods of
heaven’. They were powerful with abilities way beyond human
comprehension and yet they looked like humans, ate like humans, they
displayed the same emotions like love, hate, loyalty, anger and infidelity.
This amazing similarity has baffled historians and anthropologists for
years, mainly because they have constantly relegated Sumerian gods into
the category of mythology. The moment we venture beyond this small-
minded outlook, we can clearly recognise the genetic link between
humans and their gods. The pantheon of ‘gods of Heaven and Earth’ were
the original settlers on planet Earth who established a powerful dynasty
long before humanity entered the picture. This is what the Sumerians
believed and what they wrote about. It is also important to come to terms
with the reality that it was not about the humans, but our ancient past was
all about the gods. Humankind was a mere accidental ‘bystander’ who
was created to ease the daily grind of the gods. That is why the ancient
humans were so absorbed by them. A family of advanced proto-humans
who settled on Earth, our creators, the so-called gods who have ruled this
planet for over 400,000 years. They were closely related and yet at times,they were bitterly divided.
Sumerian gods.
AN or ANU in Babylonian, Akkadian, Assyrian. Great father of the gods.
The god of the sky, creator of heaven and Earth – God above all. His
pictographic symbol was a star which also stood for An, Heaven, divine
being or god. Anu dwells virtually exclusively in the celestial heaven,
from where he controls all worldly activities. Only seldom does he
venture down to Earth and when he does it is for a special occasion. He
meets the assembly of other gods in his heavenly abode to settle disputes;
he gives advice or reaches major decisions. The other gods have to ask
permission to enter Anu's abode, but there are stories of mortal humans
being taken up to Anu, almost always in search of immortality. The Tree
of Life and Tree of Truth were in Anu's heavenly palace being guarded by
vigilant gods named after each tree.
ENLIL: First son of Anu. The second most powerful deity. His name
meant ‘Lord of the airspace’. He is the god who controls all of the Earth.
The god of Earth, wind and storms. The principal ‘god of Heaven and
Earth’ because he descended to Earth from the heavenly abode. The
master of men's fates. Enlil sent the flood which destroyed all mankind
except Ziusudra and his family. Sumerians said that “in heaven he is the
prince, on Earth he is the chief”. He made Earth quake. He was on Earth
long before it was settled by man. He first raped his young virgin
concubine by the name of SUD, before tracking her down later and
marrying her. He bestowed the new name on her: NINLIL, which meant
‘lady of the airspace’. He had a son, who became his heir, with his half-
sister NINHURSAG. Their son NINURTA was portrayed as a “heroic son
of Enlil who went forth with net and rays of light”.
ENKI: Second son of Anu, also known as EA, which meant ‘house-
water’. Also a ‘god of Heaven and Earth’. Master engineer, god of water
and lord of the salt water who loved sailing. He built ships that sailed far
and wide, and he also brought back riches like gold to Sumer. Supreme
god of magic and wisdom and mining. Patron of the arts who was also anoracle. Prince of the Earth. He built his house at ERIDU. He mated with
Ninhursag (Lady of the mountainhead) who was his half-sister but could
not produce a male heir. He created the plants and gave men agriculture.
He constantly struggled against his brother Enlil. He was the architect of
Adam and the one who warned Ziusudra or ‘Noah’ about the impending
calamity.
ERESHKIGAL: Goddess of the underworld or ‘lower world’, and
consort of Nergal. Some consider her a dark side or aspect of Ishtar.
When Ishtar descended into the underworld to save Tammuz, Ereshkigal
tricked her into leaving some part of her clothing or insignias at each of
the underworld's seven gates as she passed through them. Standing naked
at the seventh gate, Ishtar threw herself on Ereshkigal; but she was
powerless like Samson without his hair. Ereshkigal confined Ishtar in the
underworld until the wily Ea contrived her release with a trick.
ISHTAR: Sumerian – INANNA; Egyptian – ASTARTE; Roman –
VENUS; Greek – APHRODITE. She was the greatest of all the mother
goddesses of the Mesopotamians. Goddess of love and fertility, goddess
of sex, goddess of the moon, goddess of war. Lady of heaven, lady of
sorrow and battles. The great lover, the great mother. The human-hero-
god Gilgamesh spurned her which ensured his death. Her star is Venus
and the lion is her cult animal. Ishtar's love is all-consuming and even
deadly. Ishtar's worship involved phallic symbols, sacred whores and
painted priests in women's clothing. Many temples were built in her
honour, which were minded by priestesses who performed sexual rites in
her honour. Such as the one at Uruk.
MARDUK: Also known as RA and AMUN. The great god of Babylon,
King of Kings, Guardian of the Law, the Great Sorcerer, the Great Healer,
slayer of Tiamat. Marduk represents ‘order fighting against chaos’ which
is the conflict from which all Creation emerges. Defeating Tiamat,
Marduk brought order and life to the world. When the tablets of destiny
were seized from Kingu, Marduk fastened them to his own breast, and so
brought control of the Earth under the divine authority of the gods. The
stela of Hammurabi shows Marduk on his throne with a hornedheaddress, giving Hammurabi his ring and sceptre. The Amorites saw
Marduk as a god of spring and sunlight, of herbs and trees.
NEBO: Also NABU, the son of Marduk. God of writing and speech,
speaker for the gods. Nebo maintains records of men's deeds and
produces them for judgment after death. His symbol is the stylus.
NERGAL: God of the underworld, mass destruction and plague, consort
of Ereshkigal. Thrown out of heaven, he stormed the underworld with
fourteen demons until Ereshkigal consented to marry him.
NINHURSAG: Also MAAT ‘lady mountain.’ An Earth mother. She
moulded the first man out of clay and brought him to life with the blood
of Kingu.
SHAMASH: Also UTU, son of the moon god Sin, brother and husband to
Ishtar. The great god of justice. In Sumer, a god of divination. The enemy
of darkness and all the evil darkness brings.
SIN: Also NANNAR, the moon god. Wise and secretive, the enemy of all
evil spirits. An old man with a long beard who flies through the sky in his
sailboat every night.
TAMMUZ: Also DUMUZI, God of the harvest. The god who dies and
rises again. The love of Ishtar killed him, and Ishtar fought Ereshkigal in
the underworld to bring him back.
Mayan gods and goddesses.
The ancient Mayans had a complex pantheon of deities whom they
worshipped and during the later periods of their civilisation they even
offered human sacrifices to their gods. The Mayan rulers were believed to
be descendants of the gods and their blood was the ideal sacrifice, either
through personal bloodletting or the sacrifice of captives. Their religious
rituals were elaborate and imposing, and they hosted frequent festivals to
honour their gods, with special honours to the deified national heroes
Itzamna and Kukulcan. The whole country was dotted with temples,
usually great stepped pyramids. Every god had a special feast day set
aside especially for them. The mild approach towards sacred rituals of theMayas was in strong contrast to the bloody ritual of the Aztecs who
succeeded them into a new, more brutal epoch of Humankind. Human
sacrifice was forbidden by Kukulcan (their primary deity) and crept in
only in later years. It was never a prominent feature, except at Chichen-
Itza where it at least became customary, on occasion of some great
national crisis, to sacrifice hundreds of voluntary victims of their own
race, frequently virgins, by drowning them in one of the subterranean
rock wells after which the bodies were drawn out and buried.
Mayan creational mythology refers to deities from other realms who
came to Earth to seed the planet. The Popol Vuh is the most sacred book
of the Mayas and many people see the story of the Popol Vuh as the story
of extraterrestrial gods who came down to Earth and made man in his
own image. When they first made man he was too perfect, with a lifespan
as long as theirs, he could see far and wide and was as perceptive as they
were. They realised that they had made a mistake, and created a
competitor who was as wise as the gods themselves. They proceeded to
destroy man and started over again, creating present-day man who lives
shorter lifetimes, is not as smart, and is here to act as a slave-servant to
the gods.
One part of this story tells us of the gods' first attempt to create
humans, only succeeding after several attempts, ‘he’ created the “True
People” by constructing them with maize.
“They came together in darkness to think and reflect. This is how they
came to decide on the right material for the creation of man. ... Then our
Makers Tepew and Q'uk'umatz began discussing the creation of our first
mother and father.” This story is identical to that in the Sumerian tablets
10,000 miles across the Atlantic. How is that possible? Unless the same
gods had a hand in all this activity? In another part of the Popol Vuh, it
talks about how mankind had been created as a servant of the gods.
“Let us make him who shall nourish and sustain us…We have
already tried with our first creations, our first creatures; but we
could not make them praise and venerate us. So then, let us try to
make obedient, respectful beings who will nourish and sustain us.”These various references took me by complete surprise when I first
stumbled upon them. It is virtually identical to the theory which I had
formulated before setting out to write this book. But I had not laid eyes
on the Popol Vuh or its meaning until I began researching this chapter. It
was a great personal discovery to see that others long before me had
already had such outlandish ideas.
The Mayan culture is filled with legends of visiting gods from outer
space. Kukulcan, who was also later known as Quetzalcoatl, ‘the Great
Feathered Serpent’, was a god who brought the teaching of peace to this
part of the world and appeared as a white god with a beard. The drawings
of him look almost identical to the drawings of the deity known as Ea or
Enki in the ancient Sumerian teachings. It is therefore very interesting to
compare Quetzalcoatl to the Sumerian god Enki. The behaviour and
resemblance is uncanny. Sumerian Enki tried to show Adam and Eve the
secrets of life in the garden of Eden, and was banished after which he was
referred to as the 'Devil’s snake', serpent, Satan, and every other vile
name in an attempt to discredit him and make it extremely undesirable
for human slaves to associate with him. But scholars have pointed out
that his ‘serpent’ name may have been confused in a translation from the
original Hebrew word Nanash, meaning ‘snake’, but its root is NHSH,
which means ‘to find out or to decipher’. These comparisons between the
Mayan and Sumer cultures are incredible. Is it possible that they are
merely coincidences across the Atlantic some 11,000 years ago? It seems
that after Ea or Enki was demoted by his father Anu as a result of his
benevolent actions towards humans, he travelled the world and started his
own settlements of human civilisations. After all, it was Ea who crafted
the creation of the ‘Adamu’ according to the Sumerians.
The Mayan god Quetzalcoatl is depicted as a flying serpent, which
makes perfect sense to those who can put the two together. He would fly
in from afar to help elevate his newly-chosen society, but he was soon
followed by other relatives, gods with ulterior motives. They would not
allow him to share their knowledge with the primitive slave species.
Clashes between gods is the stuff of which the Mayan mythology was
made of, just like in all the other parts of the world. They were a dynastywith infinite personal disagreements and humans were unfortunately just
the accidental bystanders who were dispensable. The Guatemalans differ
in their opinions and their acceptance of the Popol Vuh as the true story
of creation. Their affinity for the document varies depending on their
religious upbringing and beliefs. Although the tale has parallels with
many other creation stories, including Genesis, some Guatemalan
Catholics classify the Popol Vuh as an ‘artefact of history’, but not
theology. This is fascinating! If they regard it as an historic event, it must
have actually taken place! It can therefore not be regarded as mythology.
And yet most historians classify it as such.
This interaction with gods around the world leads us right back to the
notion that as advanced as the Nefilim or Anunnaki may have been in
space travel and genetics, they were certainly not the complete ‘genetic
beings’. Their violent behaviour is a clear indication of an imperfect
genome which we undoubtedly inherited from them. Here are the events
in the Garden of Eden, when ‘Nahash’ the snake, tries to educate Adam
and Eve but is caught in the act by god… in this case his brother Enlil,
who was of higher rank. Note the physical interaction and the fact that
‘god’ did not know about the eating of the apple. He was just walking
through the garden when he overheard Adam's interaction with the
‘snake’. Is that possible? That god would not know all things, taking a
stroll in the shade of the trees on a hot day? Having to call Adam's name
to ask where they were hiding and to drag a confession out of Adam?
Here is the extract from Genesis for your own consideration. Also
remember that the word ‘tree’ is a symbolic metaphor and not necessarily
an actual tree.
Genesis 3:1 -13. The Fall of Man.
“Now the serpent was more crafty than any of the wild animals the
LORD God had made. He said to the woman, ‘Did God really say,
you must not eat from any tree in the garden?’ The woman said to
the serpent, ‘We may eat fruit from the trees in the garden, but God
did say, You must not eat fruit from the tree that is in the middle of
the garden, and you must not touch it, or you will die.’. ‘You will notsurely die,’ the serpent said to the woman. ‘For God knows that
when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like
God, knowing good and evil.’ When the woman saw that the fruit of
the tree was good for food and pleasing to the eye, and also desirable
for gaining wisdom, she took some and ate it. She also gave some to
her husband, who was with her, and he ate it. Then the eyes of both
of them were opened, and they realized they were naked; so they
sewed fig leaves together and made coverings for themselves. Then
the man and his wife heard the sound of the LORD God as he was
walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and they hid from the
LORD God among the trees of the garden. But the LORD God called
to the man, ‘Where are you?’ He answered, ‘I heard you in the
garden, and I was afraid because I was naked; so I hid.’And he said,
‘Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from the tree
that I commanded you not to eat from?’ The man said, ‘The woman
you put here with me - she gave me some fruit from the tree, and I
ate it.’ Then the LORD God said to the woman, ‘What is this you
have done?’ The woman said, ‘The serpent deceived me, and I ate.’”
So now that we have a slightly broader view of the activities in the
Garden of Eden, a look at the Mayan gods will help us recognize the
behaviour of the ‘good god’ Quetzalcoatl, who was possibly also the
human-loving Enki, the Sumerian god who created Humankind as the
slave species. I'd like to remind you at this point that the term
‘Underworld’ was most likely derived from the original Sumerian name
given to the southern hemisphere where Enki discovered all the gold. It
was called the ‘Lower World’ as opposed to ‘Upper World’ where the
other gods lived, in Sumer. With time, the subtle change to ‘Underworld’
became associated with a ‘dark and horrid’ world deep in the caverns of
Earth, where the devil dwelled. Also known as Hell. So when
mythological stories talk about the ‘Underworld’, it should be seen as
Southern Africa, or Abzu, as the Sumerians called it. And not necessarily
Hell!
List of Mayan gods.Kukulcan or Quetzalcoatl - Winged God -Feather Serpent:
The Mayans called him Kukulcan - The wind god, was also known as the
‘Feathered Serpent’. The latter cultures called him Quetzalcoatl. His
pyramid was the Pyramid of the Sun in Teotihuacán, the most spectacular
of all the central American pyramids. Quetzalcoatl was tracked to Egypt,
Sumer, then later to Mesoamerica and Peru. Quetzalcoatl is also the
Aztec name for the Feathered-Serpent deity of ancient Mesoamerica, one
of the main gods of many Mexican and Central American civilisations.
The name ‘Quetzalcoatl’ literally means divine-bird snake or serpent
with feathers of the Quetzal, which implies something divine or precious
in the Nahuatl language. The Feathered Serpent deity was a central figure
in art and religion in most of Mesoamerica until the Spanish invasion. All
the other Mesoamerican civilisations have worshipped the Feathered
Serpent - the Olmec, the Mixtec, the Toltec, and the Aztec. In some latter
cultures the worship of Quetzalcoatl sometimes included human
sacrifices, although in some traditions Quetzalcoatl was said to oppose
human sacrifice. His significance and attributes varied somewhat
between civilisations and through history. Quetzalcoatl was often
considered the god of the morning star under the title
Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli, which means literally ‘the lord of the star of the
dawn’. He was known as the giver of maize corn to mankind and the
inventor of books and the calendar. Sometime as a symbol of death and
resurrection. Quetzalcoatl was also the patron of the priests. All the
characteristics fit the profile of the god Enki in Sumer.
Most Mesoamerican civilisations believe that the world exists in
cycles. Our current time is considered the fifth world, the previous four
having been destroyed by flood, fire and other disasters. Quetzalcoatl
went to the underworld, Mictlan, and created the fifth-world mankind
from the bones of the previous races, using his own blood to imbue the
bones with new life. You will see in the last chapter when we look at
Sumerian tablets, how incredibly similar this story is to that of Enki,
while creating the first human ‘Adamu’. It is simply too close to be
coincidental. Quetzalcoatl was a god of such importance and power that
nearly every aspect of everyday life seemed to be touched by him. As alegend, he would signal the end of mortal kingship.
Chac: The god of rain. Benevolent god for the Mayans, who often sought
his help for their crops. Chac was associated with creation and life. Chac
was also considered to be divided into four equal entities. North, south,
east, and west. Chac was also apparently associated with the wind god,
Kukulcan. There is some debate whether or not Kukulcan was just a
variation of Chac. Or could he have been the son of Enki, known as
Ningishzidda?
Kinich Ahau: The Sun god. He was the patron god of the city Itzamal.
He visited the city at noon every day. He would descend as a macaw and
consume prepared offerings. Kinich Ahau is usually shown with jaguar-
like features. Kinich Ahau also wears the symbol of Kin, a Mayan day.
He was also known by the name Ah Xoc Kin, who was associated with
poetry and music.
Yumil Kaxob: The maize god, representing ripe grain which was the
base of the Mayan agriculture. In some parts of Mesoamerica, like
Yucatan, the maize god is combined with the god of flora. He is shown
with a headdress of maize and a curved streak on his cheek. He is
distinguishable from other gods by his youth.
The maize god was powerless by himself. His fortunes and misfortunes
were decided by the control of rain and drought. The Rain god would
protect him but he suffered when the Death god exercised drought and
famine.
Yum Cimil: The god of death. Also could be called Ah Puch, the god of
the Underworld with a predominantly skeletal body. His adornments are
also made of bones. Yum Cimil has also been represented with a body
covered with black spots depicting decomposition. He also wears a collar
with eyeless sockets. This adornment was the typical symbol for the
Underworld. Could this have had something to do with the tradition of
mining, the symbolisms surrounding it, the clothing and protective gear
the miners might have worn?
Ixtab: Goddess of the dead – the suicide goddess. She receives their soulsinto paradise and is always represented with a rope around her neck. The
Mayans believed that suicides would lead you to heaven. It was common
for suicides to happen because of depression or for even more trivial
reasons.
Ix Chel:The ‘Lady Rainbow’ was the old moon goddess. She was
depicted as an old woman wearing a skirt with crossed bones holding a
serpent in her hand. She had an assistant sky serpent, which they believed
carried all of the waters of the heavens in its belly. She is often shown
carrying a great jug filled with water, which she overturns to send floods
and powerful rainstorms to Earth. Itzamna, her husband was the
benevolent moon god. But Ix Chel had a kinder side and was worshipped
as the protector of weavers and women in childbirth.
Other Mayan gods are:
Ah Kinchil: Another name for the Sun god.
Ah Puch:
Another name for the god of death.
Ahau
One of two gods of medicine.
Chamahez:
God of agriculture. He locks up the wind so it does not
Ahmakiq:
destroy the crops.
Akhushtal:
The goddess of childbirth.
The bacabs are the canopy gods, thought to be brothers,
who, with upraised arms, supported the multilayered sky
from their assigned positions at the four cardinal points of
Bacabs:
the compass. The Bacabs may also have been four
manifestations of the same deity. The four brothers were
possibly the offspring of Itzamna, the supreme deity, and
Ixchel, the goddess of weaving, medicine, and childbirth.
Cit Bolon
God of medicine.
Tum:
‘Stinking One’; Mayan Earthquake god and god of death,
ruler of the subterranean land of the dead. He lives
Cizin (Kisin): beneath the Earth in a purgatory where all souls exceptthose of soldiers killed in battle and women who died in
childbirth spend some time. Suicides are doomed to his
realm for eternity.
God of travellers and merchants.
Ekahau:
Kan-u-
The god who guarded cities.
Uayeyab:
Nacon:
The god of war.
Tzultacaj
The god of the mountains and valleys.
(Tzuultaq'ah):
Yaxche:
Is the Tree of Heaven under which good souls rejoice.
Egyptian gods.
RE or RA:
Egyptian sun god and creator god. He was usually depicted in human
form with a falcon head, crowned with the sun disc encircled by the
uraeus which was a stylised representation of the sacred cobra. The sun
itself was taken to be either his body or his eye. He was said to traverse
the sky each day in a ‘boat of heaven’ and pass through the underworld
each night on another ‘boat of heaven’ to reappear in the east each
morning. His principal cult centre was at Heliopolis also known as ‘sun
city’, near modern Cairo. Re was also considered to be an underworld
god, closely associated in this respect with Osiris. In this capacity he was
depicted as a ram-headed figure. By the third millennium BC, Re's
prominence had already become such that the pharaohs took to styling
themselves as the ‘sons of Re’. After death, all the Egyptian monarchs
would ascend into the sky to join the entourage of the sun god. According
to the Heliopolitan cosmology, Re was said to have created himself,
either out of a primordial lotus blossom, or on the mound that emerged
from the primeval waters. He then created Shu (air) and Tefnut
(moisture), who in turn engendered the Earth god Geb and the sky
goddess Nut. Re was said to have created Humankind from his own tears
and the gods Hu (authority) and Sia (mind) from blood drawn from his
own penis. Re was often combined with other deities to enhance theprestige of such deities, as in Re-Atum and Amun-Re. We can see the
amazing similarity to Marduk and his activity according to the Sumerian
tablets. It is written that he dictated the writing of the Book of the Dead
which gave the pharaohs clear instructions on how to reach the afterlife.
OSIRIS or USIRE:
Egyptian god of the underworld and of vegetation. Son of Nut and Geb.
His birthplace was said to be Rosetau in the necropolis west of Memphis.
Brother of Nephthys and Seth, and the brother and husband of Isis. Isis
gave birth to Horus after his death, having impregnated herself with
semen from his corpse. Osiris was depicted in human form wrapped up as
a mummy, holding the crook and flail. He was often depicted with green
skin, alluding to his role as a god of vegetation. He wore a crown known
as the ‘atef’, composed of the tall conical white crown of Upper Egypt
with red plumes on each side. Osiris had many cult centres, but the most
important were at Abydos (Ibdju) in Upper Egypt, where the god's legend
was reenacted in an annual festival, and at Busiris (Djedu) in the Nile
delta. One of the so-called “dying gods”, he was the focus of a famous
legend in which he was killed by the rival god Seth. At a banquet of the
gods, Seth fooled Osiris into stepping into a coffin, which he promptly
slammed shut and cast into the Nile. The coffin was born by the Nile to
the delta town of Byblos, where it became enclosed in a tamarisk tree.
Isis, the wife of Osiris, discovered the coffin and brought it back. The
story to this point is attested to only by the Greek writer Plutarch,
although Seth was identified as his murderer as early as the Pyramid era
of the Old Kingdom.
Seth took advantage of Isis's temporary absence on one occasion, cut
the body to pieces, and cast it into the Nile. (In the Egyptian texts this
incident accounts for the murder of Osiris.) Isis searched the land for the
body parts of Osiris, and was eventually able to piece together his body,
whole save for the penis, which had been swallowed by a crocodile
(according to Plutarch) or a fish (according to Egyptian texts). In some
Egyptian texts, the penis is buried at Memphis. Isis replaced the penis
with a reasonable facsimile, and she was often portrayed in the form of akite being impregnated by the ithyphallic corpse of Osiris. In some
Egyptian texts, the scattering of the body parts is likened to the scattering
of grain in the fields, a reference to Osiris's role as a vegetation god.
‘Osiris gardens’ – wood-framed barley seedbeds in the shape of the god,
were sometimes placed in tombs – and the plants which sprouted from
these beds symbolised the resurrection of life after death.
It was this legend that accounted for Osiris' role as a god of the dead
and ruler of the Egyptian underworld. He was associated with funerary
rituals, at first only with those of the Egyptian monarch, later with those
of the populace in general. The pharaoh was believed to become Osiris
after his death. Although he was regarded as a guarantor of continued
existence in the afterlife, Osiris also had a darker, demonic aspect
associated with the physiological processes of death and decay, and
reflecting the fear Egyptians had of death in spite of their belief in an
afterlife. Osiris was also a judge of the dead, referred to as the ‘lord of
Maat’ (i.e. of divine law).
Legendary ruler of pre-dynastic Egypt and god of the underworld,
Osiris, symbolised the creative forces of nature and the imperishability of
life. Called the great benefactor of humanity, he brought to the people
knowledge of agriculture and civilisation. The worship of Osiris, one of
the great cults of ancient Egypt, gradually spread throughout the
Mediterranean world and, with that of Isis and Horus, was especially vital
during the Roman Empire.
ISIS:
Egyptian mother goddess, one of the great members of the pantheon.
Greeks and Romans called her ‘star of the sea’ represented by the north
star. Mother of the God kings, offspring of Geb and Nut. Older sister and
consort of Osiris. We see how the half-sibling procreation continues
among the gods to keep the bloodline pure. Her other siblings are Seth
and Nephthys. Depicted with a crown in the shape of a throne or cow's
horns. She revived Osiris to life. Once after Seth threw his body into the
Nile; and secondly, after Seth had dismembered the body. She
impregnated herself from his corpse and gave birth to Horus, whostruggled to lay claim to the throne against Seth. She is identical in action
and description to the Sumerian goddess Inanna.
GEB:
Egyptian Earth god. Son of Shu and Tefnut. Brother and consort of the
sky god Nut. Father of Osiris, Seth, Isis, and Nephthys. Geb was generally
depicted lying on his back, often wearing the crown of Lower Egypt, with
the naked body of Nut arched above him. In this context, he was often
shown with an erect penis pointing upward toward Nut. Sometimes, the
air god Shu was shown standing on the body of Geb, supporting Nut and
perhaps separating her from Geb. His skin was often green, indicative of
his role as a god of fertility and vegetation. The goose was his sacred
animal and his symbol in Egyptian hieroglyphics. Geb was also said to
imprison the souls of the dead, preventing them from passing on to the
afterlife. The laughter of Geb was said to cause Earthquakes.
SETH:
God of chaos and adversity. Son of Geb and Nut and the sibling of Isis,
Osiris and Nephthys. He tore himself violently from his mother's womb
and is depicted with a head of an animal resembling an aardvark, with
erect ears and long snout. He is also linked to the Semitic goddess of war
Anat and Astarte. In about 2500 BC the kings of Egypt suddenly deserted
Seth and sided with Horus, the ‘Falcon god’. Tuthmosis III called himself
‘The beloved of Seth’. Seth was jealous of his brother Osiris and fought
an 80-year-war against him. He defended Ra against the hostile serpent
god of the ‘Underworld’. We should remember that the god of the
underworld or ‘Lower World’ was Enki, who was depicted as a serpent
often with wings, and Ra or Marduk, who was proclaiming himself as
‘god above all’ in Egypt.
HORUS:
Sky god. Also known as: Har, Har-pa-khered, Harpokrates, Harsiese,
Harendotes, Harsomtus, Har-em-akhet, Harmachis and more. Horus is
one of the most important gods of the Egyptian pantheon, attested from
the earliest recorded period. He is a universally worshipped god of Egypt
and latter civilisations. Represented by a full hawk or human body with afalcon's head. Also recognised by the ‘eye’ symbol. Son of Osiris and
Isis. The first ruler of Egypt after an 80-year struggle against his brother
and rival Seth. His mother hid him in the papyrus bushes of the Nile to
prevent him from being found by his enemies. This led to many stories
like the one of Moses in latter times. Sometimes depicted as a sun disk
with wings. ‘Horus of the horizon.’
MIN or MENU:
Egyptian god of fertility but also ‘virility’. One of the important
members of the pantheon of gods. Sometimes shown as the son of Isis or
consort of Isis, and sometimes with Horus as his offspring from Isis. He
is generally depicted as holding a flail in his raised right hand and
wearing a crown with two tall plumes. Min was mainly a god of male
sexuality, and in the New Kingdom (1567-1085 BC) he was honoured in
the coronation rites of the pharaohs to ensure their sexual vigour and the
production of a male heir. He was also depicted in human form with an
erect penis. The "White Bull" appears to have been sacred to him, as was
a type of lettuce which bore a resemblance to an erect penis and had a
white sap that resembled semen. He was also the guardian deity of mines.
His most important sanctuaries were at Koptos (Qift) and Akhmim
(Panoplis) which were gold mining locations. He was also worshipped as
a god of desert roads and of travellers. In addition to his role in
coronation rites, Min was honoured in harvest festivals during which
offerings of lettuce and sheaves of wheat were made.
AMUN:
The sun god, lord of the sky, the primeval deity present in creation and
chaos. Probably the same god as RA. In latter times he became known as
Amun-Ra. Probably the same god as Marduk, who proclaimed himself as
‘god above all’ according to Sumerian texts. Sometimes portrayed as a
pharaoh with blue skin and a turban (modius). He is surmounted by two
tall feathered plumes, showing his dominance over both upper and lower
Egypt. His main place of worship is the temple of Amun at Karnak and
Luxor. Other deities described him as “hidden of aspect, mysterious of
form”. He earned the title ‘King of the gods’ and was regarded as thefather of all pharaohs. At Thebes he was revered as a snake deity with
connotations to immortality and renewal. This would fit the Sumerian
description of the entwined serpent being the symbol of creation and
knowledge of science, used in the creation of ‘Adamu’. The temple of
queen Hatsepsut at Deir el-Bahari bears a relief of her mother
impregnated by Amun. Once again this fits the link to Marduk, Ra and
Amun, all being the same god, and insisting that all kings and queens
were descendants of the gods. This mean that sometimes Amun would do
the procreating himself. It also supports the belief among the pharaohs
that they were descendants of the gods.
African gods.
Of all the global cultures and civilisations, African mythology is the most
colourful and diverse. And yet there is an underlying common thread of
creation, descending supreme deities who were in charge, followed by
other gods of lesser importance who ruled the world and controlled all
aspects of early human life on Earth. One often forgets that Egyptian
mythology is part of African myth too. There are literally thousands of
gods that have been woven into the tales of African mythology. They
range from the very simple to the practical, from the ignorant to the wise
and prophetic. Many of the northern Mediterranean myths are closely
linked to the Egyptian gods, while the southern tales talk about gods who
descend to Earth from their heavenly abode to make man, to teach them
all they need, like agriculture and intelligence. Tales about supreme gods
who made all the other gods and created the Earth from water and chaos.
Gods who created the first man are a common ingredient in African myth.
There are many references to a ‘flying serpent’ which seems a bit too
coincidental once again to be a figment of their imagination. Lots of tales
of two gods, one benevolent and one violent, who lived in the underworld
and rose to the sky. Gods of thunder, gods of the sun, hunters, giants,
bulls, and a variety of animals. A supreme god who commands two lesser
gods, who ruled after the creation was completed, who is identical to the
Sumerian stories. It points to the simple fact, that no matter how far apart
the global civilisations may have been in the distant past, their tales offlying, powerful, benevolent and violent gods are all the same. But the
diversity of African mythology also fits the historic accounts of the
Sumerian tablets, that it was in southern Africa where the slave species
was first put to work in the mines. It is truly incredible that many of the
tales from these parts echo such sentiment. And just like the gods from
other parts of the prehistoric world, the gods are related, with a hierarchy
of responsibility. It makes perfect sense that the simplest stories with
very basic imagery should come from Africa, since it was here that the
original humans existed, who were for all intents and purposes the
‘infants’ of Humankind. As they left the secure mining compounds and
established their own settlements and cultures, they would have regular
contact from the many gods involved in the mining operations and the
control thereof. And yet as we discovered in the chapter on gold, there
were very few if any temples and shrines built in Africa by those very
early humans. They had no need to do so, and their relationship with the
gods was not at a worship stage yet. The worshipping of gods was only
imposed on humanity by the gods many years later when the slave
species made its appearance in the Near East. But the true enforcement of
worship only really occurred after the Great Flood, some 13,000 years
ago. There are so many wonderful examples that it is difficult to choose
only a few for these pages. But even through the diversity of African
mythology, there is an uncanny underlying similarity which points to the
character and activity of the Sumerian gods. The titles which Africans
have given god are wondrous in their variety. A few of these are: Creator;
Moulder; Giver of Rain and Sunshine; He Who Brings the Seasons; He
Who Thunders; Ancient of Days; the First; the Limitless; the One Who
Bends Even Kings; the One You Meet Everywhere; the Firelighter; Great
Mother; Greatest of Friends; the Kindly One; the Providence Who
Watches All Like the Sun; the Great Pool Contemporary of Everything;
the Great Spider; the One Beyond All Thanks; the Bow in the Sky; the
Angry One; the Inexplicable.
The following list is a brief and random example of African gods from a
few stories of ancient times:AGIPIE (Tanzania): A benevolent god who lives in the sky. He fights
with the evil god who has lightning and destroys people.
BUKU (Various West African peoples): A sky god sometimes
worshipped as a goddess. Buku created everything, even the other gods.
AKONGO (DRC): Supreme everlasting being, has good relations with
humans. Has human characteristics with an intense interest in all their
activities and their wellbeing. He had a quarrel with other gods and
disappeared.
ALOUKO NIAMI KADIO ( Cote d'Ivoire): Created all other gods as
well as man. After creating the world, he descended on a Saturday from
his heavenly dwelling. He taught humans all they need to know to live
and also what must remain a secret.
ANANASI (Various tribes): The spider. A trickster. A creator god.
Something of a scoundrel, but quite well-liked. Many amusing and
fanciful stories are told of him.
ANYIEWO: The Great Serpent who comes out to graze after the rain.
The rainbow is his reflection.
BUNZI (DRC): She was born as a snake to a ‘god’ father and her great
mother. The serpent grew up and assumed the role of her mother which
was rainmaking. People would see the serpent in the sky in the shape of
the rainbow.
DANH also DAN AYIDO HWEDO (Dahomey): Snake god. The Haitians
know him as Dan Petro, the Rainbow Snake who encircles the world,
Danh is often portrayed with his tail in his mouth as a symbol of unity
and wholeness.
DXUI (Bushmen; Hottentots, TSUI; to the Xhosa and Ponda, THIXO): A
creator god. In the beginning, Dxui took the form of a different flower or
plant every day, becoming himself at night, until he had created all the
plants and flowers that exist.
ESHU (Yoruba): A trickster. A shape-shifter, Eshu can change his format will, and can even seem to be both huge and small at the same time.
Eshu confuses men and drives them to madness. But Eshu also knows all
human tongues and acts as a go-between for mortals and the gods.
DOONDARI (Mali, Senegal): The creator who descended to the Earth
and created a stone, which created iron, fire, water and air. Then he
returned and shaped those elements into man. But man became too proud,
so he created blindness and also death.
DZEMAWON (Ghana): A powerful and intelligent god who comes and
goes as he pleases. He comes like the wind, he walks all over the world.
He is omnipotent and can take on any shape. On days of worship he can
appear in human form.
GUNAB (Hottentot): The enemy of Tsui-Goab, Gunab lived under a pile
of stones. Gunab kept overpowering Tsui-Goab, but the god grew stronger
after each battle. Because he killed so many, Gunab is sometimes
identified with death. Creator of the rainbow.
GUA (Ga tribe of West Africa): God of thunder, blacksmiths and
farmers. Gua's temples are often found at blacksmith's forges.
KIBUKA(Baganda): Awar god, sent to save the Baganda people. The
king of the Baganda asked heaven for assistance in war, and Kibuka was
sent to aid them. Warned not to have anything to do with the enemy's
women, Kibuka nevertheless made love to a woman prisoner. Unwisely,
Kibuka confided in her, and after escaping she told the enemy how
Kibuka could be killed, by firing arrows into the cloud where he was
hiding. Kibuka flew off to a tall tree to die, and a temple was built at the
place where his body was found.
LEZA (Central Africa): ‘The One Who Besets’, Leza is the Supreme God
who rules the sky and sends wind and rain. Leza sits on the backs of all
people, and no one can ever break free of him. Leza is said to be growing
old and so does not hear prayers as well as he once did.
MAWU-LISA (Ewe): The great god and goddess of the sun and moon.
Lisa is the sun and Mawu is the moon.MODIMO (Lesotho): Creator god, supreme being, also called Ralapeba.
Father of all might and power, feared for his vengefulness and power of
fire. He is one of 12 gods with various functions and awesomeness. A
comet called Modudusta is honoured in the name of these gods.
MUJAJI (Lovedu-South Africa): Rain goddess, queen of the Lovedu
people. Four rain goddesses have ruled over the Lovedu people, all
descendants of the original Mujaji. They are all related to the great and
mighty Monomotapa of the Karanga empire in Zimbabwe, giving us a
direct link to the mystery surrounding the Zimbabwe ruins and the lands
of Ophir filled with gold. Mujaji has mysterious powers and is immortal.
She has saved many people by bringing rain.
MULUNGU (East Africa): God and the ‘Supreme Being’. The concept of
a supreme being and creator is nearly universal in Africa. Although there
are few temples to this god, they must have been built sometime after
3,000 BC in the Mozambique and Zimbabwe areas. These temples
resemble those of Canaanite origins in the Near East. Mulungu lived on
Earth at first, but moved back to the sky because men were killing his
children. He told man that they would come up to the sky when they die.
So it is believed that when humans die they go up to heaven to be the
slaves of god.
NANAN-BOUCLOU (Ewe): The original god of the Ewe tribe, both
male and female, Nanan-Bouclou is much too remote for worship. In
Haiti, Nanan-Bouclou is remembered as the god of herbs and medicines.
NGAI (Masai): Creator god. At birth, Ngai gives each man a guardian
spirit to ward off danger and carry him away at the moment of death. The
evil are carried off to a desert, while the good go to a land of rich pastures
and many cattle.
NYAME (Ashanti): Supreme god of Heaven, both the sun god and the
moon goddess. Nyame created the three realms: the sky, the Earth and the
underworld. Before being born, souls are taken to Nyame and washed in a
golden bath. Nyame gives the souls their destinies. The soul is then fit to
be born.NYASAYE (Maragoli, Kenya): Chief god of the Maragoli. Spirits are
said to aid Maragoli's work, and they are represented by round stones
circling a pole which represents the god.
NZAME (Fan people, Congo): He is a vague and shadowy god whose
likeness cannot be captured in wood, stone or metal. Nzame lived on
Earth with his three sons, Whiteman, Blackman and Gorilla. At some
stage Blackman and Gorilla with all their kinfolk sinned against Nzame.
As a result Nzame took all his wealth and went to live with his other son
Whiteman, in the west, while Gorilla and his kin went to live in the
jungle. Without the knowledge, wealth and power of Nzame, Blackman
and his family live a hard life of poverty and ignorance, constantly
yearning for the land where Nzame lives with his favoured son,
Whiteman.
OBATALA (Nigeria): Was the creator of land. He was summoned by the
supreme being, to create land where there was only water. Then he made
man out of clay. This is virtually identical to the activity of Enki upon
arriving on Earth, as described in Sumerian tablets.
RUHANGA (Uganda): Creator of all things and living conditions on
Earth. He retired to the sky but could not prevent the rise of evil and
death. He established the unequal roles of society: the king, the
herdsmen, the farmers.
SAGBATA (Dahomey; the Yoruba, Shagpona): God of smallpox.
Sagbata's shrines were painted with a design of small spots. In Mayan
culture such small spots represented the decomposing bodies of those
struck down by the god of death. Sagbata's priests fought small pox with
both prayers and medical knowledge, and wielded great power over the
people.
TANO (Ashanti): The second oldest son of god, and god of the river, who
had the same name. The gods of the other rivers and families in the same
region are all his family. Long ago Tano lost a singing match with Death.
Tano and Death sang defiance to each other for over a month, but neither
could win so they had to compromise. When someone is injured or fallsill, whichever god arrives first will claim him. If Tano arrives first, the
person will live, but if Death arrives first the patient is lost.
TSUI' GOAB (Hottentots): ‘Wounded Knee’and ‘Father of Our Fathers’.
Arain god who lives in the clouds who is a great chief and magician. Tsui'
Goab made the first man and woman from rocks. Several times Tsui'
Goab died and rose again, to great joy and celebration. Men invoke Tsui'
Goab with the first rays of dawn and recite oaths in his name.
UNKULUNKULU (Zulu): ‘Old, Old One’– Unkulunkulu was both the
first man and the creator, a god of the Earth who did not travel between
Earth and the heavens. Unkulunkulu showed men how to live together and
gave them knowledge of the world in which they lived.
WELE XAKABA(Luyia-Kenya): Supreme being who created the world
and is the giver of all things. First created his own home in heaven, which
was a place “ever bright” supported with pillars. The first human couple
lived in a place called Embayi, a house in the air supported by poles.
Mainly because there were monsters called Amanani on Earth. The first
humans did not know how to have intercourse and lived many years
without children. Later Mwambu and Sela did have intercourse and had a
son called Lilambo, and so humans multiplied on Earth. This god was
also known as the Sun god who takes an Earthling girl into heaven and
makes her his wife.
YO (The creative spirit, Bambara/Mali): This creative spirit used three
beings to create all things. This included seven heavens corresponding to
the seven parts of the Earth. First they created men, and after some time
the woman from dust and saliva. Men are immortal, becoming 7-year old
children each time they reach the age of 59. They live unclothed, have no
needs, they don't speak or work.
ZIMU (Ndebele, South Africa): Is the supreme being. He sent a
chameleon with a message to tell the people that they will “die and rise
again”. But the lizard got to the people first and told them that they would
“die and not rise again”. By the time the chameleon delivered his
message of hope the people did not believe him and chose to believe thelizard.
African mythology is so rich and colourful that one could go on forever.
The link that we have created in this book to our original ancestors in
Africa, draws much support from these tales. As one reads them they
seem to be more naïve and more ancient than all the other civilisations.
The relationship between gods and humans was more simple, more
defined and unquestionably obedient. There was also mysteriously no real
need for worship and hardly ever any mention of sacrifices to the gods.
These characteristics separate African mythology greatly from all the
others, where sacrifice and temple worship form a major part of the
rituals. In prehistoric Africa, gods and men seem to have lived side by
side with very little friction. There are many tales which include a
supreme deity with two sons or a daughter, who go down to Earth to make
it habitable and to create man. They inevitably begin a feud which results
in many clashes between the gods, and divides their human followers.
Controversial South African mystic and Sangoma (medicine man), Credo
Mutwa, talks about the Zulu legends of the most ancient gold mines of
Monomotapa in Zimbabwe. In his book Indaba My Children, he points
out the legends that speak about “artificially produced flesh and blood
slaves, created by the First People”. The legends recount how the slaves
“went into battle with the Ape-Man” when “the great war star appeared in
the sky”. As we delve deeper into these stories it becomes very clear that
the continent of Africa was a hive of activity in the early days of pre-
history, long before the civilisations of the Near East and the Americas
blossomed. Man was an infant finding his way in the world and the gods
had their hands full, trying to control these human slaves.
Chinese mythological gods.
Chinese history and religion are inextricably linked to their mythology.
According to ancient tradition, the Chinese were savages until a sage
came along and taught them how to construct shelters. Some time later
wise men taught the original Chinese the use of fire, music and the
cultivation of crops, in succession. The last of these sages was the Yellow
Emperor Huangdi, the father of Chinese civilisation. Where Huangdisuddenly appeared from is not known, but he bestowed all knowledge on
the Chinese people. Could he have been one of the Anunnaki gods on
their expansion road to the East? If we accept that the gods of Sumer, or
Anunnaki gods, were actually the progenitors of civilisation in other parts
of the world, then the same should apply in China. Huangdi carries all the
mystical attributes which place him squarely in the realm of Anunnaki
gods. The discovery of Homo erectus fossils called ‘Peking Man’ in 1921
near Beijing led to claims that the earliest humans evolved in China, and
that the Chinese were the earliest modern humans who evolved into a
unique indigenous race. This has subsequently been proven not to be true
and the accepted place for the cradle of Humankind has been established
in southern Africa. The Chinese Human Genome Diversity Project, a
collaboration among 12 researchers from seven institutions, scrutinised
DNAsamples from 28 of China's 56 ethnic groups and then compared the
samples with genetic material from other Asian and non-Asian groups.
The outcome was that, just like the rest of humanity, the Chinese evolved
in Africa. This may have been the case, but the huge influence the Aryans
had on the development of the entire Asian civilisation has somehow
been overlooked. It is said that the early humans migrated eastward along
the Indian Ocean and made their way to China via Southeast Asia. The
report linked to the Genome Project further mentions “It is now safe to
conclude that modern humans originating in Africa constitute the
majority of the current gene pool in Asian populations”. I find it
interesting that the report says “majority” of the current gene pool. If all
humans originated in Africa, was there another genetic pool source? If so,
where did this ‘other’ gene pool originate from? Did the elusive and
influential Aryans who were responsible for populating Europe, and
whose influence spread across Asia, have something to do with it? Or was
the Yellow Emperor Huangdi possibly the other gene pool contributor?
The gods whom the Chinese people worshipped at the dawn of their
civilisation may have had different names, but their functions and their
powers were identical to the deities from other civilisations. Chinese
religious practice calls on great and powerful divine ancestors. Could
those ancestors who are deified in Chinese mythology have been the earlyAryans who had special powers and technology way beyond the primitive
local earthlings of the time? Or were these ancestors even more powerful
than the Aryans… could they have been the omnipresent Anunnaki gods
who were taking control of the rapidly expanding world towards the East?
The Sumerian tablets certainly seem to suggest such expansion by the
Anunnaki gods, mainly driven by Inanna. But her relatives and siblings
were all in on the act, trying to snatch a piece of the world for themselves
and establish their own group of loyal, obedient human slaves.
Dragons play a central role in all of Eastern mythology, sometimes
crossing over into popular religion. Their origins and backgrounds are
amazingly close to stories of biblical and Sumerian origins. There are a
number of dragons that differ slightly as you move further east. The one
thing that strikes me, is that the image of the Chinese dragon is very close
to the flying serpent of the Mayas, and other cultures. In many depictions,
the dragon is long and thin, more closely resembling a ‘serpent with
wings’ rather than a flame-spitting monstrous dragon. Could this be
another influence of Enki, the serpent of the Garden of Eden fame, and
the ‘flying serpent’ of the Mayas? Because kings in China were appointed
by sanction of the supreme being, they also became deified and often
worshipped. Is it possible that just like in Egypt, the Chinese emperors
were also half-god, half-man, and therefore often worshipped, becoming
‘gods’ unto the people like the Pharaohs? The subtle differences between
the Chinese, Korean and Japanese dragons raise a curious link to the
possible expansion towards the East, by the supporters of Enki and
Inanna, and the lower ranks assigned to the lesser gods who were placed
in charge of those new lands. Chinese dragons have 5 toes, Korean have 4
toes and Japanese dragons have 3 toes. Could this represent the
diminishing ranks of the Anunnaki gods far away from Sumer and their
commander Enlil? But the stories surrounding the origins of some of the
dragons are remarkably similar to many Sumerian and biblical tales.
Kinabalu: The Eastern Dragon, lived at the top of Mount Kinabalu in
Borneo and was in possession of a splendid pearl which was desired by
the Chinese emperor. Many men tried to capture the pearl from thedragon but they were all killed in the process. Then the emperor sent out
brothers Wee Ping and Wee San to get the pearl from the dragon. They
waited until the dragon went to find food, then they flew onto the
mountaintop with a kite and replaced the pearl with a fake pearl. But the
dragon was not fooled and gave chase to the thieves as they were
escaping in a ‘boat’. As the dragon approached, Wee San launched a
cannon ball at him. The dragon thought the cannonball to be his pearl and
swallowed it and died. Wee Ping wanted to take the pearl and the glory
and lied by saying he was the one who managed to steal it from the
dragon. Wee San wanted no more trouble over the pearl and left China.
He later became the happy leader of Brunei. Wee Ping on the other hand,
was not so lucky, for his lying brought him nothing but sadness.
The symbolism of this story is clearly linked to ‘pearls of wisdom’
tales. One such story which carries many similarities, is the Sumerian
tale of Inanna stealing the tablets of wisdom or ME from her uncle Enki.
She flew to his mountain retreat and seduced him. She also escaped in her
boat, but this was a ‘boat of heaven’ which could fly. Is it coincidence
that Enki was the ‘flying serpent’ of the Sumerian culture and probably
other cultures too? So the ‘flying serpent’ or dragon gave chase to
retrieve his ME tablets of wisdom from Inanna, but was unable to do so.
The similarities in the storyline are remarkable. We must remind
ourselves that the Chinese stories were written many thousands of years
later than the Sumerian tablets, but it is quite possible that they may have
existed in oral form for millennia. The symbolisms surrounding the
dragons are very intriguing. Enki was the serpent who could fly and
therefore could be seen as the ‘winged serpent’. His flying machines
created a noise and so did the fire dragons while flying and spitting fire.
Is it not possible that the different eastern dragons were just
representations of the different Anunnaki gods in their flying machines
during the early days when they were colonising Asia and keeping their
human ‘slaves’ obedient and fearful? There are several stories about
dragons, their sudden appearance and lessons they brought to the people,
the fear they spread, and control they had over many aspects of Chinese
life. Most, if not all of the stories, resemble Sumerian stories regardingthe activities of the Anunnaki gods, long before China became civilised.
Another dragon story reminds me in its symbolism of the story around
the birth of Christ, where a young virgin falls pregnant to a stranger, or
angel, who disappears. During the birth of Jesus the cave was filled with
magnificent light, brighter than the sun. The child grows up as an outcast,
but he eventually becomes the ‘white prince of peace’ slaying evil
everywhere, eventually rising into the ‘sky’. The young girl Mary,
became revered by millions and worshipped in prayer. Now see the
remarkable resemblance:
It is interesting that this particular dragon was called ‘The White
Dragon’ or Pai Lung. The legend of Pai Lung begins on a stormy night,
when a young girl answered the door to a stranger who came calling
looking for shelter from the storm. He was an elderly man, while she was
a virgin. The next morning the stranger was gone, but the young girl was
pregnant. Her parents were enraged by this and threw her out of the
house. When the child was born, it appeared to be a small white ball.
They discarded the white ball into the ocean. To everyone's surprise, this
ball grew into a magnificent white dragon. The young girl, terrified and
shocked, fainted and never again woke. Another variation of this story
says that she was killed in a great storm, after which the ‘white dragon
rose into the sky’. She was revered for being the mother of this
magnificent dragon, the only White Dragon King. She was buried at the
foot of a hill, where people ask for favours, pardons, and other blessings.
A temple was erected on the summit of this hill, and a tablet is there
which records this legend. It is also important to note that the White
Dragon was a five-toed dragon; brilliantly white, the same way the
appearance of ‘angels’ or the many ‘gods’ is described in the Bible and
Sumerian tablets. Could the 5 toes represent the highest order of the
divine Anunnaki hierarchy?
The following story is basically a repeat of the Great Flood tale, which
was allowed to wipe out mankind, according to the Sumerian tablets. It
was a plan originally devised by Enlil, after he realised that Humankind
had become a huge burden on the Anunnaki and the flood would remove
the problem very quickly and effectively. The same story is told invirtually every civilisation of the world.
The Yellow Emperor was the supreme god of China, who looked down
upon Earth and saw that people were evil and filled with wickedness. So,
the Yellow Emperor ordered the ‘rain god’ to make endless rain. A great
flood followed causing everything to die. One of the gods named Kun,
looked down and was saddened by this devastation. Kun was the grandson
of the Yellow Emperor who pleaded with his grandfather to make the
rains stop, but the Yellow Emperor did not stop the flood. An old tortoise
told Kun that in order to stop the rain he needed magic mud. The tortoise
also explained that the Yellow Emperor had a jar of this mud inside his
treasury. Kun stole the jar of magic mud and went down to Earth.
Wherever he sprinkled the mud, islands grew and the water was sucked
up. Kun travelled over the Earth spreading this magical mud and making
new land as fast as he could. But the Yellow Emperor saw what Kun was
doing and sent the ‘fire god’ down to kill him. Kun saw the fire god
coming, so he transformed himself into a white horse and tried to hide.
Still, the fire god send down lightning, which struck Kun and killed him
on top of a mountain. Out of Kun's body grew a splendid son called Yu,
who was a beautiful golden dragon. Yu flew up to the heavens to see his
great grandfather, the Yellow Emperor, begging him to end the flood. The
Yellow Emperor made Yu the ‘rain god’ with all the powers needed to
perform his task, and allowed him all the amount of magic mud that
could be piled upon the old tortoise's back. Yu made the rains stop, but
much of the land remained under the water. So, he and the old tortoise
went down to Earth, sprinkling the magic mud as they went. Then, after
this was done, Yu used his tail to plough the mighty rivers of China.
While carving the Yellow River, they came upon an obstacle of rocky
cliffs. As Yu carved a chasm into the cliffs, he declared it to be the
Dragon's Gate, which would always be sacred to dragons. Yu became a
hero to the people, they begged him to be their emperor. So Yu
transformed into a human and lived on Earth among the people as the
Chinese Emperor.
There are so many symbolic similarities to other ancient scriptures it
truly boggles the mind. But the one that really tickles me is the close linkto the Anunnaki story of the Great Flood. Enlil was the supreme
commander of Earth who decided to allow the impending flood to wipe
out humanity because of their “evil ways”. People believed that it was
Enlil who brought the rain and the flood. But his brother Enki, one of the
‘other gods’was saddened by the devastation and saved Humankind from
extinction. He was also known as being the god of water and marshes,
with the ability to reclaim land from water, which is what he did soon
after arriving on Earth. Enlil outranked Enki and in that way ‘killed’ his
challenge to save humans. And just like Kun's son Yu, became the god of
the Chinese people, Marduk, the son of Enki, became the ‘god above all’
who lived among the people on Earth by marrying a mortal female and
leading the semi-god movement in many civilisations where kings were
half-god, half-human. Here are some more Chinese gods to digest:
SHANG-TI (Yu):
The highest deity and supreme ancestor of the Shang and Chou dynasty.
The Shang worshipped ‘Shang Ti’, a supreme god who ruled over lesser
gods, the sun, the moon, the wind, the rain, and other natural forces and
places. Highly ritualised ancestor worship became a part of the Shang
religion. Sacrifice to the gods and the ancestors was also a major part of
the Shang religion. When a king died, hundreds of slaves and prisoners
were often sacrificed and buried with him. People were also sacrificed in
smaller numbers during important events, such as the founding of a
palace or temple.
CH'ENG-HUANG:
God of walls and moats. Every village and town had its own version of
Ch'eng-Huang. This was often a local dignitary or person of importance
who had died and been promoted to divine status or ‘godhood’. Such a
divine status was revealed in dreams, but ultimately the gods made the
final decision. Ch'eng-Huang not only protects the community from
attack, but also sees to it that the ‘King of the Dead’ does not take any
soul from his jurisdiction without proper authority. Ch'eng-Huang
exposes evil-doers in the community itself, usually through dreams. He
has two assistants – Mr. Ba Lao-ye and Mr. Hei Lao-ye, who are Mr.Daywatchman and Mr. Nightwatchman.
CHU JUNG:
God of fire. Chu Jung punishes those who break the laws of heaven.
KUAN TI:
God of war. The ‘Great Judge’ who protects the people from injustice and
evil spirits. A red-faced god dressed always in green who is also an
oracle. Kuan Ti was an actual historical figure, a general of the Han
dynasty renowned for his skill as a warrior and his justness as a ruler.
There were more than 1600 temples dedicated to Kuan Ti.
KWAN YIN:
A popular goddess of mercy and compassion. A lady dressed in white, she
is depicted seated on a lotus, holding an infant. After being murdered by
her father, she recited the holy books when she arrived in Hell. The
disgruntled god sent her back to the world of the living, where Kwan Yin
attained great spiritual insight and was rewarded with immortality by the
Buddha. Her temple at the Mount of the Wondrous Peak was always
filled with lots of pilgrims shaking rattles and setting off firecrackers to
get her attention.
LEI KUNG:
God of thunder. Lei Kung chases away evil spirits and punishes criminals
whose crimes have gone undetected. He has the head of a bird, wings,
claws and blue skin, and his chariot is drawn by six boys. Lei Kung
makes thunder with his hammer, and his wife makes lightning with her
mirrors.
PAHSIEN:
These are the 'Eight Immortals' of the Taoist tradition. They were
ordinary mortals, who were rewarded with immortality for their good
works and good lives, by the Queen Mother Wang, by giving them the
peaches of everlasting life to eat. They are:
LU TUNG-PIN – A hero of early Chinese literature. Renouncing riches
• and the world, he punished the wicked and rewarded the good, and slew
dragons with a magic sword.TIEH-KUAI Li – He of the Iron Crutch, who was a healer. Li sits as a
• beggar in the market place selling ‘wondrous’ drugs. Some of these can
revive the dead.
CHUNG-LI CH'UAN – A smiling old man always beaming with joy,
• who was rewarded with immortality for his ascetic life in the
mountains.
TS'AO KUO-CHIU – Ts'ao Kuo-Chiu tried to reform his brother who
• was a corrupt emperor, by reminding him that the laws of heaven are
inescapable.
LAN TS'AI-HO – A young flute-player and wandering minstrel who
• carries a basket filled with fruit. His soul-searching songs caused a
stork to snatch him away to the heavens.
CHANG-KUO LAO – An aged hermit with miraculous abilities. Chang
• owned a donkey that could travel at incredible speed. He was the
personification of the primordial vapour that is the source of all life.
HAN HSIANG-TZU – A scholar who chose to study magic rather than
prepare for the civil service. When his uncle reprimanded him for
•
studying magic, Han Hsiang-Tzu materialized two flowers with poems
written on the leaves.
HO HSIEN-KU – Immortal Maiden, is a Cantonese girl who dreamt
• that she could become immortal by eating a powder made of ‘mother-
of-pearl’. She appears only to men of great virtue.
P'AN-CHIN-LIEN:
Goddess of prostitutes. As a mortal she was a widow who was much too
liberal and creative with her favours. Eventually her father-in-law killed
her. She was revered in death by her professional associates who
honoured her. She eventually became the goddess of whores.
SHI-TIEN YEN-WANG:
Ten rulers of the underworld who were known as ‘The Lords of Death’.
They dress alike in royal robes and only the wisest can tell them apart.
Each ruler presides over one court of law. In the first court a soul is
judged according to his sins in life and sentenced to one of the eightcourts of punishment. Punishment is dispensed to fit the offence. Misers
are made to drink molten gold and liars have their tongues cut out. In the
second court are incompetent doctors and dishonest agents; the third
court has forgers, liars, gossips, and corrupt government officials. In the
fifth court there are murderers, sex offenders and atheists; in the sixth,
the sacrilegious and blasphemers; in the eighth, those guilty of filial
disrespect; in the ninth, arsonists and accident victims. In the tenth court
is the Wheel of Transmigration. This is where souls are released to be
reincarnated after their punishment has been completed. Before souls are
released, they are given a brew of oblivion, which makes them forget
their former lives.
TI-TSANG WANG:
God of mercy. Wandering in the caverns of Hell, a lost soul might
encounter a smiling monk whose path is illuminated by a shining pearl
and whose staff is decorated with metal rings that chime like bells. This
is Ti-Tsang Wang, who will do all he can to help the soul escape hell and
even put an end to his eternal round of death and rebirth.
Just like in the Sumerian, Greek, Egyptian, Mayan and African myths,
there were a number of humans who were given immortality by the gods
of China for various reasons. We also see the importance of prostitution
and sex, represented adequately by gods and goddesses in Eastern
mythology. They support the Sumerian and biblical writing that the male
gods had a ferocious sex-drive and loved human females, which is
evident in the many temples related to sexual acts and prostitution. While
the same can be said about the goddesses, there is generally more
reference to the sexual needs of male gods which is supported by the
temples of virgins and prostitutes. It does not take a trained eye to see the
similarities to Sumerian gods and an underlying common thread binding
the mythologies together.
Greek gods.
The Greek gods were probably the most anthropomorphic gods of any
civilisation. This means that while they were gods, they possessed human
attributes. They did however have some important differences to humanbeings. They were ageless and immortal, unlimited by physical
restrictions, could take any shape they pleased, could go anywhere
quickly, without much effort and often doing so invisibly. They were
allowed to also perform a host of immoral acts, which were reserved for
them only. Their sexual appetite was insatiable. Each god had his or her
own special function. Just like in Sumer, the gods formed a distinctly
untouchable and divine society living around the supreme deity Zeus, on
Mount Olympus. Theirs was the highest level of society, which was a
reflection of the organisation of societies in the ‘heroic’ age. Just like the
Sumerians, the Greeks also had deities who lived on Earth or in the
‘Underworld’. Those were called ‘Chthonian’ or ‘gods on Earth’. The
others were the ‘Olympians’ or ‘gods of heaven’. In 1 Corinthians 8:5
there is an intriguing reference to the ‘gods of heaven’ and the ‘gods on
Earth’ once again showing that the people of biblical times were not
hallucinating, and that there were other deities or gods whom we know
nothing about today, mainly through the long and perpetual eradication
process carried out by religious authorities.
1 Corinthians 8:4-6
“We know that an idol is nothing at all in the world and that there is
no God but one. For even if there are so-called gods, whether in
heaven or on Earth (as indeed there are many ‘gods’ and many
‘lords’), yet for us there is but one God, the Father, from whom all
things came and for whom we live…”
In a similar fashion to the Sumerian gods, the Greeks had two groups of
gods. The Titans were the first to rule the world, they were the elder
group, who were overthrown by the Olympians who were led by Zeus.
Although Greek deities were omnipresent and universal, their activities
were attached to definite places. Temples in their honour were set within
‘temenos’, which were sacred precincts set aside for gods and deities.
They would contain a spring for purification and a grove of trees. There
was always an altar, placed in front of the temple, which was the one
indispensable item at a shrine, because it was necessary for sacrifice
during the main act of worship. Greek temples would house the deity'simage and possessions and it was not a place of assembly for worshippers
but it was actually seen as the home of the deity. People went to the
temple to make offerings, rather than for private prayer. This indicates
that the gods actually used to frequent these temples. They expected to be
treated well, to be cared for by their human slaves and be provided with
all the luxuries they required.
The Titans – First group of Greek gods.
Gaea or Gaiais the Earth goddess. She mated with her son Uranus to
produce the remaining Titans.
Uranus is the sky god and first ruler. He is the son of Gaea, who created
him without help. Together with Gaea they had many offspring, including
the Titans. His rule ended when Cronus castrated him. It is not clear
whether he died from the wound or withdrew from Earth. Uranus was
jealous of the future power of his children and feared he would lose his
rule to them. To prevent this he threw his children into the underworld.
At the instigation of Gaea, her son Cronus castrated his father and
dethroned him. When Uranus' blood fell upon the Earth (Gaea), the
Erinyes or ‘goddesses of vengeance’ and the Gigantes (giants) sprang
forth, among many other divinities. You will find out more about Erinyes
and their Roman counterparts, the Furies later.
Cronus is the ruling Titan who came to power by castrating his father
Uranus. His wife was Rhea and their offspring were the first of the
Olympians. To insure his safety Cronus ate each of their children as they
were born. Rhea was unhappy at the loss of her children, and tricked
Cronus into swallowing a rock, instead of Zeus, who would revolt against
Cronus and the other Titans, defeat them, and banish them to Tartarus in
the underworld. It is said that Cronus was killed by a ‘thunderbolt’
unleashed by Zeus. But other stories say that he escaped to Italy, where
he ruled as Saturn. The period of Zeus' rule was said to be the ‘golden age
on Earth’, honoured by the Saturnalia feast.
Rhea is the wife of Cronus who made it a practice to swallow their
children. Rhea saved her son Zeus by tricking Cronus into swallowing arock. Zeus grew up and deposed his father Cronus. Rhea is seen as the
mother of the gods, daughter of Uranus and Gaea. She is also the mother
of Demeter, Hades, Hera, Hestia, Poseidon and Zeus. Rhea is identified
with mother goddess Cybele from Asia Minor and is also known as Rhea
Cybele and Magna Mater or 'great mother'. She was worshipped with
orgiastic rites. Rhea is depicted between two lions or on a chariot pulled
by lions.
Oceanus is the unending stream of water encircling the world. Together
with his wife Tethys, they produced the rivers and the 3,000 ocean
nymphs. He is the personification of the vast ocean, especially the waters
outside of the Pillars of Heracles, or the Atlantic Ocean. He was the son
of Uranus and Gaia and the eldest of the Titans. He was the father of all
rivers by his sister Tethys. The couple also had the Oceanids which
personified springs and smaller bodies of water, like lakes and ponds.
Tethys is the wife of her brother Oceanus and the god-mother of Rhea,
who was raised during the war between the Titans and the Olympians.
Tethys was the personification of the fertile ocean and with Oceanus had
3,000 children which were the springs, lakes and rivers of the world, also
referred to as the “three thousand ocean nymphs”. Who were these
Nymphs?
In Greek mythology Nymphs were divine females associated with
various natural objects. There is debate whether they were immortal or
merely long-lived, in which case they would have been half-human, half-
goddesses, akin to Sumerian mythology. There was an infinite variety of
nymphs representing various localities, rivers, lakes, mountains and
more. Nymphs were depicted as young, beautiful, musical, amorous, and
gentle, although some were associated with the wilder aspects of nature,
while others were vengeful and capable of destruction. Whichever way
one looks at it, the Nymph cult was huge in Greece and they possessed all
the characteristics displayed by lower ranked Anunnaki deities, who were
in charge of the lesser fortified towns as part of the divine control over
Humankind.
Hyperion is the Titan of light and an early sun god. He is the son of Gaeaand Uranus who married his sister Theia. His name means ‘he who goes
before the sun’. Their children were Helius - the sun, Selene - the moon,
and Eos - the dawn.
Mnemosyne was the Titan of memory and the mother of the nine Muses
by her nephew Zeus.
Themis was the Titan of justice and order, one of the daughters of Uranus
and Gaea. She is the personification of the ‘divine right order of things’
as sanctioned by custom and law. She has oracular powers and it is said
that she built the oracle at Delphi. She is the mother of the Horae and the
Moirae. Themis is depicted as a stern looking woman who is blindfolded
and holding a pair of scales and a cornucopia. The Romans called her
Justitia because her name means law. Themis introduced the ordinances
which concern the gods and instructed men in the ways of obedience to
laws and peace. Themis delivered oracles at Delphi until Apollo, the
lovely son of Leto, came to the city, killed the serpent Python that
guarded the oracle, and usurped power. Leto did not give Apollo her
breast when he was born, but Themis, who was there, fed him with nectar
and ambrosia. Themis told the Titan Prometheus not to join the Titans in
their war against the Olympians, because as she prophesied, in that war,
the clever, not the brutal, would prevail. Themis was deemed guardian of
men's oaths and for that reason also called the ‘goddess of oaths’. She
lives on Mount Olympus close to Zeus, who is described as the real all-
seeing god as he whispers words of wisdom to Themis.
Iapetus was the father of Prometheus, Epimetheus, Menoetius, and Atlas,
by Clymene.
Coeus is the Titan of Intelligence.
Phoebe is the Titan of the Moon.
Prometheus was the son of Iapetus and the wisest of all Titans. His name
means ‘forethought’ and he was able to foretell the future. When Zeus
revolted against Cronus, Prometheus deserted the other Titans and fought
on Zeus’ side. By some accounts he and his brother Epimetheus wereinstructed by Zeus to create man. In all accounts, Prometheus is known as
the protector and benefactor of man. He gave mankind a number of gifts
including fire. He also tricked Zeus into allowing man to keep the best
part of the animals identified for sacrifice to the gods while giving the
gods the worst parts. Zeus punished Prometheus by having him chained to
a rock with an eagle tearing at his liver. He was to be left there for all
eternity, or until he agreed to disclose to Zeus which of Zeus' children
would try to replace him. He was rescued by Heracles without ever giving
in to Zeus.
Epimetheus was a stupid Titan, whose name means ‘afterthought’. He
was the son of Iapetus and brother of Prometheus. In some accounts he is
delegated by Zeus to create mankind along with his brother. He also
accepted the gift of Pandora from Zeus, which lead to the introduction of
evil into the world.
Atlas was also the son of Iapetus. But unlike his brothers Prometheus and
Epimetheus, Atlas fought on the side of the Titans supporting Cronus
against Zeus. Due to Cronus' advanced age, Atlas lead the Titan's in
battle. And so he was singled out by Zeus for special punishment and
made to hold up the world on his back.
Phoebe is the goddess of the Moon and the daughter of Uranus and Gaia.
She married her brother Coeus and with him she became the mother of
Leto and Asteria. It is said that she owned the oracle of Delphi before
Apollo took it over.
Metis was the goddess of the forth day and the planet Mercury. She
presided over all wisdom and knowledge. She was seduced by Zeus and
became pregnant with Athena. He killed or swallowed her in fear that his
heir would be more powerful than him.
Dione means ‘divine queen’. According to Homer in the Iliad, she is the
mother of Aphrodite by Zeus.
There were a host of other gods and semi-gods but for the purpose of
keeping this to the point, which is very difficult at this stage, let's jump to
the next generation of Greek gods who ruled the world.The Olympians – Second group of Greek gods.
The Olympians are a pantheon of 12 gods who ruled the world after they
defeated the Titans. All the Olympians are related in some way. They are
named after their dwelling place, Mount Olympus.
Zeus is the supreme ruler of the gods who overthrew his Father Cronus.
He had to draw lots with his brothers Poseidon and Hades to determine
his leadership. Zeus won the draw and hence became the supreme ruler.
This story is identical to that of Enlil and Enki of the Anunnaki gods, who
also had to draw lots when they were dividing the Earth. Zeus is lord of
the sky, and Earth. Just like Enlil, he has fearsome weapons but his
favourite weapon is the thunderbolt which he uses against those who
displease him. He is married to Hera, but is famous for his many affairs.
He is also known to punish those who lie or break oaths.
Poseidon is the brother of Zeus. After the overthrow of their father
Cronus, he drew lots with Zeus and Hades for a share of the world. He
became lord of the sea and therefore he was widely worshipped by
seamen. He married Amphitrite, a granddaughter of the Titan Oceanus,
but he desired Demeter. She asked him to make the most beautiful animal
that the world had ever seen to distract him. So to impress her Poseidon
created the first horse. In some accounts his first attempts were
unsuccessful and he created a variety of other animals in the process.
Very similar to the story of Enki and Ningishzidda in the Sumerian tales.
By the time he created the horse, his passion for Demeter had waned. His
weapon is the trident, which can shake the Earth and shatter any object.
He was second in command to Zeus amongst the gods. He had a difficult,
quarrelsome personality. He was greedy. He had a series of disputes with
other gods when he tried to take over their cities. This is like a blend of
Enki and Marduk of Sumerian and Babylonian stories.
Hades is the other brother of Zeus who partook in the drawing of lots
after the overthrow of their father Cronus. He had the worst draw and was
given the underworld, to rule over the dead. He is a greedy god who is
constantly concerned with increasing the subjects of his domain. He isalso the god of wealth, overseeing the precious metals mined from the
Earth. He is exceedingly disinclined to allow any of his subjects to leave.
He has a helmet that makes him invisible. He rarely leaves the
underworld. He is unpitying and terrible, but not capricious. His wife is
Persephone whom Hades abducted. He is the god of the dead but death
itself is another god, Thanatos. The Erinyes are always welcomed guests
in the underworld.
Erinyes – But who were the mysterious Erinyes? The one account says
that the Erinyes (Roman – Furies) were birthed out of anger from the
blood of Cronus, as it landed on Earth. They were three sisters Tisiphone,
Megaera and Alecto. They were the punishers of sinners, also called
‘those who walk in darkness’, persecutors of humans who broke natural
laws. They would hiss like vipers and they would descend like a storm,
sometimes overcoming their victims with deadly smoke. They were often
depicted with dog-like faces and were fierce. When not stalking victims
on Earth the Furies were thought to dwell in the Tartarus mountains
where they applied their tortures to the damned souls. They were also
referred to as the Eumenides – the Kindly Ones, the Potniae – the Awful
Ones, the Maniae – the Madnesses, and the Praxidikae – the Vengeful
Ones. Their activities very closely resemble the ‘bloodless and lifeless’
robot-like clones created by Enki to avenge the death of his niece Inanna.
“From clay of the Abzu, Enki two emissaries fashioned, being without
blood by death rays unharmed.” They were created to track down and
destroy the guilty ones. They were fierce, indestructible and relentless,
closely resembling what we would call ‘terminators’ today. Were these
‘Anunnaki emissaries’ the original Erinyes and Furies? “Not even the sun
will transgress his orbit but the Erinyes, the ministers of justice, overtake
him.” Or were they biblical angels, interfering and vengeful, delivering
god’s message and retribution?
Hestia is Zeus' sister, the virgin goddess. She does not have a distinct
personality and plays no part in myths. She is the ‘Goddess of the
Hearth’, the symbol of the house around which a new-born child is
carried before it is received into the family. Each city had a public hearthdedicated and sacred to Hestia, where the fire was never allowed to go
out.
Hera is Zeus' wife and sister. She was raised by the Titan gods Oceanus
and Tethys. She is the protector of marriage and married women. Hera's
marriage began under difficult circumstances and continued in strife with
Zeus. At first Zeus made advances towards her unsuccessfully. To trick
her, he changed himself into a dishevelled cuckoo. Hera felt sorry for the
bird and held it to her breast to warm it. Zeus resumed his normal form
and took advantage of her and raped her. The young Hera married him to
cover her shame. At one point when he was overbearing to the other gods,
Hera convinced them to stage a revolt. Hera drugged him while the gods
bound the sleeping Zeus to a couch with many knots. This done, they
began to quarrel over the next step. Briareus slipped in and was able to
quickly untie the many knots. Zeus sprang from the couch and grabbed
his thunderbolt and hung Hera from the sky with gold chains. She wept in
pain all night but no one dared to interfere. Her weeping kept Zeus up, so
the next morning he agreed to release her if she swore never to rebel
again. While she never again rebelled, she often questioned Zeus' plans
and she was often able to outwit him. Most stories concerning Hera have
to do with her jealous revenge for Zeus' infidelities. Her sacred animals
are the cow and the peacock.
Ares is the god of war and son of Zeus and Hera. He was disliked by both
parents. While he was considered murderous and bloodthirsty, he was
also a coward. Although he was immortal, he was very sensitive to pain
and went running to his father Zeus, whenever he got wounded. He is
identified with Mars in Roman mythology. When Halirrhotius raped
Alcippe, Ares' daughter by Aglaulus, Ares murdered him, for which he
was tried in a court. Some say that this was the first murder trial in
history, but he was acquitted. His companions included his sister Eris, as
well as his sons Phobos and Deimos, and Enyo. Otus and Ephialtes were
two giants who put Ares in an urn. To rescue Ares, Hermes changed
himself into a deer and caused the giants to throw their spears at each
other.One night, while seducing Aphrodite, Ares put a youth named
Alectryon by his door to guard them. The youth fell asleep and Helios the
sun, walked in on the couple. Ares turned Alectryon into a rooster, a bird
that never forgets to announce the arrival of the sun in the morning.
During the Trojan War, Ares was seen fighting on the Trojans' side. Hera,
Ares' mother, asked Zeus for permission to drive Ares away from the
battlefield. Hera encouraged Diomedes to attack Ares, after which he
threw his spear at the god. But it was Athena who drove the spear into
Ares' body. He bellowed in pain and fled to Mt. Olympus, forcing the
Trojans to fall back. Ares was only rarely the recipient of cult worship.
He was venerated most often in conjunction with other gods. For
example, he shared a temple with Aphrodite at Thebes.
Athena is the daughter of Zeus. She came forth from his forehead, full-
grown and dressed in armour. And so she has no mother. She is a virgin
goddess, but she is fierce and brave in battle. She only fights to protect
the state and home from outside enemies. Athena is the goddess of the
city, handicrafts and agriculture. She invented the bridle, which permitted
man to tame horses; the trumpet, the flute; the pot; the rake; the plough;
the yoke; the ship; and even the chariot. She is the embodiment of
wisdom, reason, and purity. She was Zeus' favourite child and was
allowed to use his fearsome weapons including his thunderbolt.
Apollo is the son of Zeus and Leto and a twin brother to his sister
Artemis. He is the god of music, often depicted playing a golden lyre. He
is also the archer, shooting far with a silver bow; the god of healing who
taught man medicine; the god of light, and even the god of truth, who can
speak no lie. One of Apollo's more important daily tasks is to harness his
chariot with four horses and drive the Sun across the sky. He is famous
for his oracle at Delphi. People travelled to it from all over the Greek
world to consult the oracle on their future.
Aphrodite is the goddess of love, desire and beauty, the wife of
Hephaestus. In addition to her natural gifts she has a magical girdle that
compels anyone she wishes to desire her. In truth, she is a seductress.
There are two accounts of her birth. One says she is the daughter of Zeusand Dione. The other story is derived from when Cronus castrated Uranus
and tossed his severed genitals into the sea, Aphrodite arose from the sea
foam on a giant scallop and walked to shore in Cyprus.
Hermes is the son of Zeus and Maia, and the messenger of the gods. He
is the fastest of the gods and known to wear winged sandals, a winged hat,
and he carries a magic wand. He is the god of thieves and god of
commerce, and also the guide for the dead who journey to the
underworld. He invented the lyre, the pipes, the musical scale, astronomy,
weights and measures, boxing, gymnastics, and even how to care for olive
trees.
Artemis is the daughter of Zeus and Leto, and the twin sister of her
bother Apollo. She is a virgin goddess, and the goddess of chastity. And
yet she is the lady of the wild things and the ‘huntsman’ of the gods. She
is the protector of the young and just like Apollo she hunts with silver
arrows. She became associated with the moon and also presides over
childbirth, which may seem odd for a virgin. It is said that it was she who
caused Leto to have no pain at her own birth. All wild animals are sacred
to her, especially the deer.
Hephaestus is the son of Zeus and Hera. It is also said that Hera alone
produced him and that he has no father. He is the only god to be
physically ugly and also lame. The stories of how he became lame vary.
Some say that Hera, upset by having an ugly child, flung him from Mount
Olympus into the sea, breaking his legs. Others say that he took Hera's
side in an argument with Zeus and Zeus flung him off Mount Olympus.
He is the patron god of both smiths and weavers. He is kind and peace-
loving and yet Hephaestus is the god of fire and the forge, using a
volcano as his forge. He is the smith and armourer of the gods. His wife
is Aphrodite but sometimes his wife is identified as Aglaia.
Roman gods.
The Roman gods are as popular today as they were 2,000 years ago. Their
names have been used in countless movies, fictional stories, science
fiction tales, and a multitude of global brands have borrowed their namesfrom Roman gods. But because they were mostly derivatives of the
earlier Greek gods, we will introduce them briefly, to show their obvious
Greek heritage. There were many dozens of gods worshipped by the
Romans, but they specifically honoured a pantheon of 12 gods called Dii
Consentes. They were Iuppiter, Iuno, Minerva, Vesta, Ceres, Diana,
Venus, Mars, Mercurius, Neptunus, Volcanus, and Apollo. These are the
gods listed by the Poet Ennius around the 3rd Century BC. These six male
and six female gods were probably worshipped at the Lectisternium of
217 BC. This was a banquet of the gods, where the statues of the gods
were raised on cushions and offered meals. This is a clear hangover from
the ancient Greek and even the earlier Sumerian tradition. Exceptthe food
offered to the ancient Sumerian and possibly Greek gods was done in the
gods' own temples with a very strict set of rules. Those old temples were
actually the resting places of the Anunnaki gods, while travelling from
place to place. The number 12 clearly runs throughout all these ancient
mythologies, with only a few cultures that may differ from that – like the
African mythologies. But we have already established that the African
myths are much older in their style and approach, pointing to a very early
relationship between the gods and Humankind. Atime before worshipping
was enforced on the human slaves, even long before the Great Flood.
What is also evident is that the Roman gods arose from a void with no
mythological tradition associated with them. It is as if the Romans
simply inherited the Greek pantheon of 12 Olympians and changed their
names. It is said that Julius Caesar had the ‘Alexander’ disease, trying
everything in his power to match the conqueror’s accomplishments. It is
clear that the gods infected the rest of the Romans with their own brand
of mania. But the pantheon was introduced in stages to the Romans. They
were led by the first three, which formed the Capitoline Triad. These
became the three cornerstones of Roman religion, whose rites were
conducted in the Capitoleum Vetus on the Capitoline Hill. This tradition
was probably the driving force behind the introduction of the ‘Holy
Trinity’, the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, which was introduced into the
Roman Catholic faith by the first ever ‘global’ council of Church leaders,during the ‘Council of Nicaea’ in 325 AD. A wonderful example of how
even in the Catholic faith, the line between history and myth is extremely
fragile. It is evident that Roman mythology greatly influenced the
thinking of the leaders of the early Catholic Church. But there were many
other gods who played a major role in Roman culture and tradition. Just
like they did in all the earlier civilisations. It was not only the gods, but
the cults that surrounded them, that best characterise the origin of the
Roman Religion. The family cult of the Dii Familiaris!
We find the following gods, spirits and deities in this cult:
The Lar Familiaris – the guardian spirit or Genius of the family;
The Lares Loci – the guardian spirits of the place where the house is built
and the Genius of the paterfamilias or House-Father;
The Dii Penates – patron gods of the storeroom;
The Dii Manes – the spirits of the deceased.
There was a multitude of other domestic deities who were worshipped
daily by the members of the family. The household cult was so important
that it even served as the model for several practices of the state cult. Not
surprising, since we have learnt from the Sumerians how the lesser gods
looked after the smaller towns and villages in the outlying areas, while
the more senior gods would have the privilege of looting the more
attractive spoils of the larger, wealthier cities. So the well-entrenched
customs of the smaller towns became attractive to the gods of the larger
cities, where their control over the humans may not always have been as
smooth as expected. This resulted in the state cult using the models of the
peasant family cults as an example for expansion. For example, even
during the Empire, the Imperial cult came to be based on the household
cult, which was then interpreted as the cult of the ‘Genius of the
Emperor’ or the ‘paterfamilias’– ‘House-Father’ of the family of all the
Romans.
Other important Roman gods were Ianus, Saturnus, Quirinus,
Volturnus, Pales, Furrina, Flora, Carmenta, Pomona, Portunus, Fontanus.
But there was also a group of mysterious deities consisting of native
guardian deities; river gods or deified heroes from the Latium region,which are collectively called Dii Indigites. A multitude of other deities
were also traditionally worshipped, which included other guardian deities
of native Latin origin, like Roma, Tiberinus, Bellus, Bellona, Liber,
Libera, abstract deities such as Fortuna (Fate), Concordia (Concord), Pax
(Peace), Iustitia (Justice), and more. It must also be added that the very
mysterious group of people called the Sabines, who lived north east of
Rome, played a major part in the development of Roman culture.
Contributing many gods, like Pluto, to the heavenly family, they
influenced Roman mythology and religious practice in many ways. They
seem to resemble the mysterious Igigi, as mentioned in Sumerian tablets,
who also lived in isolated communities, yet contributed greatly to the
Sumerian culture, mainly by marrying mortal women, creating a whole
new breed of semi-gods. Like the Igigi, and their descendants the Aryans,
these gods from the Sabines symbolised the innovative and creative
power on Earth, which provided humans with technology and the means
for subsistence.
Romans were always willing to pay homage and sacrifice to foreign
deities, especially when travelling in their land. They would go as far as
making greater sacrifices to the gods of their enemies, than what was
offered by their own people, before going to war, in order to win favour
from the enemy’s gods to secure victory. And so the foreign gods
infiltrated Rome, resulting in the building of temples and shrines to the
new gods called Dii Novensiles. Among those were Apollo, Ceres,
Bacchus, Isis and more. This all goes to show that the Romans were
innocent bystanders during a ‘changing of the guard’ by the gods as a new
wave of Anunnaki gods infiltrated Rome and its culture, bringing a whole
new order to the newly established global power, which was operational
only by the grace of the gods who allowed this new global power to
triumph over their enemies. Here is a list comparing Roman and Greek
gods:
Roman - Greek Roman - Greek
Apollo - Apollo Mars
- Ares
Bacchus - Dionysus Mercury - HermesCeres
- Demeter Minerva - Athena
Coelus - Uranus Neptune - Poseidon
Cupid - Eros
Pluto
- Hades
Cybele - Rhea
Proserpina - Persephone
Diana - Artemis Saturn
- Cronus
Hercules - Heracles Ulysses - Odysseus
Juno
- Hera
Venus
- Aphrodite
Jupiter - Zeus
Vesta
- Hestia
Latona - Leto
Vulcan
- Hephaestus
Let us now move further east, to demonstrate how incredibly well these
fairytales of the gods travelled around the world in antiquity, when
humans could hardly travel to the next city.
Japanese gods.
Japan presents us with a similar melting pot of religious traditions to
those in China, but the blend is somewhat different and quite unique.
What is most fascinating, is the smooth crossover from myth to history.
All the ancient Japanese writings seem to have no visible borders
between what is today accepted as myth and what is actual history. This
is truly remarkable, since many Western historians are very happy to
make those distinctions for them. We know that the islands which are
today known as Japan were only created some 13,000 years ago,
coinciding with the great flood. Before that, the Japanese Islands were
connected to the Asian continent by land. This was during the Ice Age
and humans from the Eurasian continent were migrating east. The reasons
for the migration may have been to follow the food supply by following
animal herds, or it could simply have been to get away from the vengeful
gods of the lands in which they lived. Remember that the people left
behind on Earth during the flood, believed that the gods had deserted
them and tried to destroy them all. When they survived the flood, god
came down from the heavens, and his instructions were to “be fruitful and
multiply”. The subtext to this instruction was actually to ‘disperse acrossthe world and do not attempt to challenge the gods’… ‘or you will be
punished again’. This was some time before the Anunnaki gods bestowed
agriculture on humanity, while man was still hunting animals and
gathering food. The ancient Ainu (i´nj) people of Japan are a real mystery
to anthropologists. Some say that these hairy and heavily bearded people
who lived in the northern part of Japan, had been in those parts ten
thousand years ago, while others estimate that the Ainu first inhabited
parts of Japan around 3,000 to 4,000 years ago, during the last half of the
Jomon period. This would fall perfectly into our time-frame as the
Aryans moved east colonising new territories and enforcing not only their
influence but spreading some of their gene pool as well. This eastward
expansion was either followed or preceded by the Anunnaki gods who
were granted the domains of the East by Enlil, to rule and develop. So
every part of the world would have had a different group of gods, each
with their own unique way of handling the human situation. Ainu means
‘human’. They believed that nature gods, house gods, mountain gods,
lake gods, all existed together in symbiotic relationships which included
man. There is nothing new in that line of thinking since we know from
the Sumerians and the Greeks that they also had different gods looking
after different villages and aspects of their lives. The Ainu believed that
the gods helped Humankind and must be appreciated by them. The Ainu’s
daily life was a continuous ritual to the gods and their mutual assistance
to man, which tells us that this was before the gods decided to impose the
concept of sacrifice and worship on humans, during the time of the
Anunnaki expansion shortly after the flood. All the reports available
make it pretty clear that the Ainu did not have it very easy. Unless they
had a real interaction with the gods, and unless they were directly
engaged in some kind of relationship with the deities of their lands, why
would they waste their time on issues which did not contribute towards
their survival and wellbeing? The gods or deities who resided in the lands
of the Ainu must have been very real and as demanding as the other gods
of the later humans. The Ainu's mixture of European and Asian physical
traits contrast so sharply from other indigenous peoples of Asia, that no
one is really sure of their origin. Some theories hold they are ofCaucasian descent, others say that their distinct features are a result of
isolation that allowed them to remain racially unchanged as the rest of
the mongoloid races mixed and evolved through a series of migrations.
Could they be another link to the influence of the Aryans as they explored
the East and left behind their mark on human population everywhere?
The literature of Shinto or ‘Way of the Gods’ employs much of the
Japanese mythology to describe the supposed historical origins of Japan.
We can see clearly that religion and mythology are in fact inseparable.
The earliest Japanese records we possess are the Kojiki – Record of
Ancient Things and Nihongi – Japanese Chronicles written in 712 AD and
720 AD respectively. In the Kojiki Part 1, we are introduced to the
Japanese divine ‘trilogy’ which was alive and well even in Japan, while
creating Heaven and Earth. The influence of the gods of Rome seems to
have spread much further than just the Roman Catholics. In the Kojiki, as
translated by B.H. Chamberlain in 1882, we are told about this Japanese
trilogy of supreme deities.
PART I:
The Birth Of The Deities & The Beginning Of Heaven And
Earth.
“The names of the deities that were born in the Plain of High Heaven
when the Heaven and Earth began were the deity Master-of-the-
August-Centre-of-Heaven; next, the High-August-Producing-
Wondrous deity; next, the DivineProducing-Wondrous deity. These
three deities were all deities born alone, and hid their persons. The
names of the deities that were born next from a thing that sprouted
up like unto a reed-shoot when the Earth, young and like unto
floating oil, drifted about medusa-like…”
According to the creation story found in the Kojiki, the Japanese islands
were created by the gods, two of whom descended from heaven to carry
out the task. These gods; male god Izanagi and the female goddess
Izanami, also brought into being other kami (deities or supernatural
forces), such as those influencing the sea, rivers, wind, woods, and
mountains. Two of these deities, the Sun Goddess, Amaterasu Omikami,and her brother, the Storm God, Susanowo, warred against each other,
with Amaterasu emerging victorious. This again, is identical to the
Sumerian and Greek myths where heavenly siblings fight each other.
IZANAGI and IZANAMI:The creator god and goddess sent down from
heaven to build the Earth. The other gods and goddesses followed them
and were their descendants. Descending to the underworld, Izanami
became old and ugly. Izanagi followed her to bring her back, but she
forbade him to look at her. When Izanagi looked at her, she tried to
imprison him in the underworld. Pursued by Izanami's furies, (see Roman
Furies) Izanagi escaped and sealed up the entrance to the underworld with
a boulder. It is fascinating to see that the Greeks had Erinyes, the Romans
had Furies, and that the Japanese also had Furies, to do the dirty work.
Izanami was enraged and vowed to kill a thousand of Izanagi's subjects a
day, while Izanagi vowed to create fifteen hundred a day. So it was that
Izanami became the goddess of death and Izanagi became the lord of life.
While the above is a mythical story, the pages of the Kojiki tell us the
so-called historical tale of how Izanagi ventured into the lands of the
underworld in search of his beloved Izanami. Once again our mythologies
get tangled up as we meet the Greek god Hades, god of the underworld,
brother of Zeus, who had imposed his influence on Izanami. Suddenly the
Japanese mythology blends with Greek mythology, using a Greek god's
name as if it was quite acceptable to do so some 6,000 miles away,
sometime between 13,000 and 4000 years ago. Where did Hades make his
name first then? Greece or Japan?
The story is told very beautifully in the Kojiki. Unable any longer to
bear his grief, Izanagi resolved to go down to the Nether Regions in
search of his beloved Izanami and bring her back at all costs, to the
world. There were countless dangers to negotiate on his way, but
Izanagi's determination conquered them all. He finally reached a large
castle which must have been where she was being kept. But the gate was
guarded by a number of gigantic demons, some red, some black, guarding
the gates with watchful eyes. He went around the back and to his surprise,
the rear gate was left unguarded. He cautiously crept through the gate andafter some searching and calling he found his beloved wife:
“My darling, I have come to take thee back to the world. Come back,
I pray thee, and let us complete our work of creation in accordance
with the will of the Heavenly Gods, our work which was left only
half accomplished by thy departure. How can I do this work without
thee? Thy loss means to me the loss of all.”
Imagine his surprise when she responded with the following:
“ Alas! Thou hast come too late. I have already eaten of the furnace
of Hades.
Having once eaten the things of this land, it is impossible for me to
come back to the world… I wish, with all my heart, to go back with
thee, but before I can do so, I must first obtain the permission of the
deities of Hades.”
Just as the Sumerian gods divided the lands and appointed different gods
to rule them, the Japanese gods did the same. In this excerpt from the
Yengishiki or Shinto Rituals, we get a glimpse of such an event.
“I declare with the great ritual, the Heavenly ritual, which was
bestowed on him at the time when, by the Word of the Sovereign's
dear progenitor and progenitrix, who divinely remain in the plain of
high Heaven, they bestowed on him the region under Heaven, saying
- Let the Sovereign Grandchild's augustness tranquilly rule over the
country of fresh spikes which flourishes in the midst of the reed-
moor, as a peaceful region.”
Battle of the Japanese gods.
In the chapter of ‘The Door of the Heavenly Rock-Dwelling’ of the
Kojiki, we read of a peculiar set of events which may have many different
interpretations by historians. But if you remove the emotion, it sounds
pretty close to some of the descriptions in Sumerian tablets of when
conflict erupted among the Anunnaki gods. Even the Japanese gods were
emulating their Sumerian ancestors as they clashed and fought each other
from time to time in their quest for supremacy. And as in any conflict
situation, there were usually victors and those who were banished. Anykind of violent eruptions among the gods would have looked miraculous
to the early humans. The following texts seem to be very poetic
descriptions of the prelude to conflict, and the resulting outburst which
caused one of the rebellious deities to be expelled from the “heavenly
abode”. This kind of thing had been happening on Earth for several
hundred thousand years among the Anunnaki as they grew in numbers
and their desires for earthly things increased.
“So thereupon the Heaven-Shining-Great-August deity, terrified at
the sight, closed behind her the door of the Heavenly Rock-
Dwelling, made it fast and retired. Then the whole Plain of High
Heaven was obscured and all the Central Land of Reed-Plains
darkened. Owing to this, eternal night prevailed. Hereupon the
voices of the myriad deities were like unto the flies in the fifth moon
as they swarmed, and a myriad portents of woe all arose. Therefore
did the eight hundred myriad deities assemble in a divine assembly
in the bed of the Tranquil River of Heaven, and bid the deity
Thought-Includer, child of the High-August-Producing-Wondrous
deity, think of a plan, assembling the long-singing birds of eternal
night and making them sing, taking the hard rocks of Heaven from
the river-bed of the Tranquil River of Heaven, and taking the iron
from the Heavenly Metal-Mountains… His Augustness Heavenly-
Beckoning-Ancestor-Lord prayerfully reciting grand liturgies, and
the Heavenly Hand-Strength-Male deity standing hidden beside the
door, and Her Augustness Heavenly-Alarming-Female banging
round her the heavenly clubmoss the Heavenly-Mount Kagu…
laying a sounding-board before the door of the Heavenly Rock-
Dwelling and stamping, till she made it resound and doing as if
possessed by a deity, and pulling out the nipples of her breasts,
pushing down her skirt-string ‘usque ad privates partes’. Then the
Plain of High Heaven shook, and the eight hundred myriad deities
laughed together…. Thereupon the eight hundred myriad deities
took counsel together, and imposed on High-Swift-Impetuous-Male-
Augustness a fine of a thousand tables, and likewise cut his beard,and even caused the nails of his fingers and toes to be pulled out, and
expelled him with a divine expulsion.”
AJI-SUKI-TAKA-HI-KONE: One of several thunder gods. Born noisy,
he grew up even noisier, and so they carry him up and down a ladder to
quieten him. That is why you can hear him receding and approaching. The
‘ladder to the sky’ is an important bit of imagery in this myth. Why
would all the myths always refer to gods going up into the sky and
reappearing from there every so often?
AMA-NO-UZUME: The Fertility goddess. A companion of Ninigi, she
performed a bawdy dance hoping to entice the sun out of hiding. This
dance symbolises the planting of seed which waits for the sun to come
after winter. Is there a possible link here to the Igigi, who were the
possible progenitors of the Aryans, also teaching them about agriculture
and technology?
AMATERASU: The Sun goddess, ruler of the heavens. When her great
enemy, the storm god Susa-No-Wo, destroyed her palace, Amaterasu
went to hide in a cave. The other gods used all their magical tricks to get
her to come out, but to no avail. In her absence, darkness and demons
ruled the Earth until Ama-No-Usume lured Amaterasu out of the cave
with a trick. With a comical and obscene dance, he made the gods who
were gathered at the mouth of the cave laugh. When Amaterasu asked
what was going on, Ama-No-Uzume replied that they had found another
and better sun goddess. Amaterasu peeped out of her cave and saw her
own reflection in a mirror which Ama-No-Uzume had hung on a nearby
tree. Fascinated, Ameratasu drew a little closer for a better look, and the
gods grabbed her and hauled her out.
BENZAITEN: Goddess of love, one of the gods of happiness. Benzaiten
rides a dragon while playing a stringed instrument. There is very little
difference between her and Venus, and Inanna and Ishtar and other love
goddesses. They all seem to be attracted to music, dance and culture.
BISHAMON: God of happiness and war, which is a rather strange
combination. Bishamon protects men from disease and demons.Bishamon was often portrayed wearing a wheel of fire like a halo, which
some see as the 'Wheel of Fate'.
AMATSU MIKABOSHI : “August Star of Heaven”. God of evil.
CHIMATA-NO-KAMI: God of crossroads, highways and footpaths.
Originally a phallic god, his phallic symbol was placed at crossroads.
HO-MASUBI: The Fire god. His birth killed the creator goddess
Izanami, and his father, the creator god Izanagi, was so enraged with grief
that he killed the baby. From his blood came eight gods, and from the
body came eight mountain gods. Compare this to the Greek story of
Cronus and Zeus and the other gods who were created from spilt blood.
KAWA-NO-KAMI: The god of rivers. While larger rivers have their
own gods, all waterways are under Kawa-No-Kami's authority. When
rivers flooded the gods were sometimes appeased with human sacrifices.
NAI-NO-KAMI: God of Earthquakes, was a late addition to the Japanese
pantheon. Nai-No-Kami was inducted in the seventh century AD. This
supports the stories about the so-called ‘angels’.
NINIGI :Grandson of Amaterasu, the ‘divine grandchild’ sent to rule the
Earth.The ancestor of all the Japanese emperors. The name and
description of this god is reminiscent of the Sumerian Igigi who were the
supporters of Marduk, who was also a divine grandchild. He married
earthling females and contributed to the creation of the white Aryan tribe.
But the interesting thing is that their semi-divine descendants were the
kings of Egypt, according to Sumerian tablets, as Ninigi was to the
Japanese emperors.
O-KUNI-NUSHI: God of sorcery and medicine. He was originally the
ruler of the province of Izumo, but he was replaced by Ninigi. In
compensation he was made ruler of the unseen world of spirits and
magic. Once again the Ninigi connection is fascinating, since the Igigi
were the advanced proto-Aryans with knowledge of medicine and
technology.
SENGEN-SAMA: Goddess of the sacred mountain of Fujiyama.Worshippers greet the rising sun at her shrine on top of the mountain. The
Sumerian goddess Ninhursag also known as Ninmah, ‘Exalted Lady’ –
had her own mountain retreat. She was really the ‘mother goddess’ of
humanity and one of the original creators of ‘Adamu’. Could it be seen
that in the east she was worshipped as such, represented by the rising sun
over Humankind?
SHINE-TSU-HIKO: God of the wind. Shine-Tsu-Hiko fills up the empty
space between Earth and heaven, and together with his wife Shina-To-Be,
they hold up the Earth. Greeks and Romans have identical gods
performing these tasks.
SUSA-NO-WO: God of storms, snakes and farming. He was Amaterasu's
brother and greatest enemy. From the moment he was born, he was a
troublemaker. After Amaterasu was finally taken out of her cave, Susa-
No-Wo was punished. The other gods shaved his beard and moustache,
pulled out his fingernails, and banished him to live as a mortal on the
Earth.
The above extracts represent only a few of the gods of ancient worlds.
The cultures and civilisations run into thousands of pages, for which I
suggest you turn to specialised literature, which will certainly keep you
gasping with amazement. Once you begin to identify the similarities and
relationships between the gods, the entire mythology subject takes on a
whole new perspective. The incredible wealth in diversity of all these
ancient gods, and the interaction between gods and humans is almost
impossible to imagine in today's society. That kind of ongoing activity,
which at times turned into mayhem, could only have been possible if it
was enforced on humans. I cannot imagine that the close similarities in
all of these cultures are mere coincidences. The basic storylines of the
gods of Sumer are echoed throughout all of the world's mythologies.
There is a constant presence of higher gods and lesser gods; benevolent
gods and violent gods; supreme gods and sons of gods; houses of the gods
and their sexual playgrounds. Goddesses and their offspring, outlining the
genealogy of the gods which points to the same hierarchical structure of
an extended family of gods around the world. Closely related but highlydivided in their hunger for control. The genetic makeup behind this kind
of behaviour points directly to our own programmed DNA passed down
from the gods. In the last chapter we will explore the great epic of
humanity from birth until today, outlining the moment when man was
created and inherited this highly disturbing genetic feature from his
makers, the “gods of Heaven and Earth” as outlined in the Sumerian
scripts.
I n The Lost Book of Enki, Zecharia Sitchin tells the chilling tale of
Lord Enki, the master-mind behind the creation of humans. A story of
humanity from the beginning to the tragic events surrounding Sodom and
Gomorrah which according to Enki was preventable and unnecessary.
Enki was Anu's first son, one of the three supreme leaders on Earth after
their arrival some 445,000 years ago. He was the true humanitarian
among the Nefilim gods “those who to Earth from heaven came” which
eventually led him to dictate these pages to his scribe Endubsar, who
states: “These were the words of the lord Enki. Written from the mouth of
the great lord Enki, not one word missed, not one word added by the
master scribe Endubsar, a man of Eridu, son of Udbar.” Although these
tablets were referred to in other finds, it took a determined effort to
uncover them in the ruins of museums and archaeological sites. These
ancient events which were captured by Sumerian scribes have now been
translated and presented to humanity in the year 2002 AD by Zecharia
Sitchin. Mr. Sitchin has dated the events at Sodom to 2024 BC. It
therefore stands to reason that these tablets, as dictated by Enki, must
have been written shortly after those events, after 2024 BC. Sitchin is the
largest private owner of Sumerian tablets in the world, which allowed
him to present these translations to an unaware civilisation in 2005 AD.
This body of work which comprises 308 written pages, is now the most
complete source of information about the obscure events in our past. It
shines a spotlight on the concept of mythology and the popular modern
explanations of these myths. It makes it painfully clear that there were
things going on in the biblical past that have been purposefully concealed
from humanity. It also raises very serious questions about utterances in
the Bible and their credibility, when compared to the older Sumerianscriptures. These translations remove much doubt about the existence of
the “gods of Heaven and Earth” who controlled the world with an iron
fist. It proves our genetic ancestry belongs both on Earth and in deep
space, on a planet called Nibiru. It explains the previous speculation of
who we are and where we come from, with all the necessary supporting
evidence that humans have been searching for. The most disturbing facts
that emerge from this find, are that there must have been an extremely
sinister but well-executed plot of manipulation against humanity, by
Enki's brother Enlil. This supreme commander on Earth was never in
favour of the creation of humans and certainly did not want to go out of
his way to ensure the survival of humans on Earth. It is turning out to be a
distinct possibility that the entire Bible was a masterstroke of pandemic
proportion. A continued and carefully controlled saga of propaganda and
indoctrination of humanity by Enlil himself. This control must have
started after the flood, when Enlil realised that humans had been saved
against his wishes, he also realised that the only way he would be able to
control humanity was with absolute power, control and fear, using strong-
handed, dictatorial tactics. From that moment on, Enlil would be their
god, ruling them through intimidation, fear, bloodthirsty violence; but he
also rewarded them for loyalty and obedience for complying with his
commands. But his nephew Marduk wanted to seize the power on Earth,
which was promised to him by his father Enki, right at the beginning,
shortly after they arrived on Earth. He would choose his favourite people
and help them above others, using them for his devious plans. From about
3200 BC at the rise of the Egyptian empire, Marduk and Enlil became
engaged in a long struggle for control of Earth. While Enlil enforced
clear principles of ‘divide and conquer’ among humans, Marduk became
the ‘god above all’ taking control of Egypt, promising his kings eternal
life in the world beyond, if they followed him. Slowly but surely Marduk
also absorbed and enforced the principles of ‘divide and conquer’ as he
took control of the planet. As fate would have it, the slave species became
not only the accidental victims in the ‘war of the gods’, jostling for
control of the planet, but the humans became the ignorant ‘foot soldiers’
of the Anunnaki in their struggle for power. These were the early biblicaldays, which are well corroborated in both Hebrew and Sumerian
scriptures. Gods chosen people conquering the others.
Throughout human history, Enlil did everything in his power to
suppress human evolution and emancipation. He did this constantly and
relentlessly as we have clearly shown, fearing that humans would grow
wiser and stronger if they evolved, which would pose a great threat to his
global empire. It is not clear if it was Enlil or Marduk, but their ultimate
masterstroke was that they had all these ancient events written and
captured by men, loyal and fearful of the great ‘god of vengeance’. These
written works were treated as holy by man, and over the years they were
compiled into a collection of books which today is called the Bible,
besides other holy scriptures. Ask any war or propaganda strategist today
and they will tell you one thing. If you repeat a lie enough times, it will
become the truth. Especially if you enforce it with the threat of violence.
Stalin was a master of propaganda and indoctrination. So much so that
even after the fall of the Soviet Union and the exposure of the Kremlin
vaults, there are millions of supporters who remain loyal to Stalin,
refusing to believe that any of those horror stories about him are true. The
people who have been reading and misinterpreting the Bible, constantly
ascribing some inexplicable tales to situations that make absolutely no
sense, have fallen victim to such tactics. They are so filled with fear that
it consumes their minds, rendering them incapable of clear independent
thought. Saying that “it is the way of the lord, and god planned it, because
he did not want us to know everything”. Well, they are correct. The gods
did not want us to know the terrible truth behind the manipulation of
humanity, and how we were controlled with fear, violence, retribution
and reward. This is the story of the entire Old Testament.
Now that we are confident of our place at the pinnacle of human
evolution and knowledge, comes the time when we have to ask ourselves
the life-altering question. Do we believe that the ancient clay tablets are a
message from our concerned ancestors, or do we discard it as
insignificant mumbo-jumbo written by some wild mad-man to confuse
us? The decision is yours to make. I trust that you will weigh up the
evidence and realise that the universal community of beings is a distantcry from the barbaric acts of bloodthirsty settlers on Earth. The so-called
god with a small ‘g’ never to be confused with God with a big ‘G’. Many
people will feel greatly disturbed by this information and will fear ‘god's
vengeance against their evil thoughts’. Stop the fear, see the light of the
real God, the God of love, the God of mercy, the Prince of Peace. Not a
gluttonous deity who wants gold and goats and people offered to him as a
gesture of loyalty. While this knowledge may be too horrific to
contemplate, I see it as the most liberating experience, which has exposed
the real God to me, answering many of the questions that have haunted
humanity. Knowledge is power and this knowledge will help me to
understand whose name I call when I say my prayers. The God of the
universe, the universal spirit, the Supreme Being. Armed with this
knowledge, I can look forward to the continued journey of humanity as
we evolve towards a complete genome which will open the portals of our
mind and allow us to rejoin the universal community of beings.