CHAPTER 15
The Mystery of Jesus and Other Prophets
No matter how you look at the figure of Jesus Christ, whether he was
the son of God or just an inspired prophet who took the troubles of the
world upon his shoulders, he left behind a legacy that has inspired
billions of people. The debate about the 'prince of peace' is almost always
filled with deep emotion, which more often than not leads to heated
exchange by people who speak of him as if they knew him personally.
They make bold statements about what Jesus would have done, how he
would have reacted and what he would have said, if he was in present
company. And since the writings of alternative historians, which tell us
different stories about ‘Jesus the Man’, are mostly treated with suspicion,
the most that religious scholars could possibly tell us about the man, is
what they have read in the New Testament. I must hasten to add that
much of what was written in the New Testament is probably quite
different from his original teachings. If we take into account all the new
evidence presented in this and other books about our ancestry; and
although reluctantly we accept that we are the descendants of a more
advanced race who created us as a slave species, one question remains to
be answered: Who was Jesus Christ?
After doing an extensive search on a Bible website consisting of a
multitude of different Bible versions, I got a very surprising result. The
very first time that the words ‘Jesus’; ‘Christ’; ‘messiah’ and ‘son of
God’ appear in the Bible, is in the book of Matthew. And if my maths
serves me right, that is the 40th book of the Bible, which also happens to
be the first book of the New Testament. Is it not a little odd that there is
no reference by name to the ‘messiah’ who is supposedly the main
attraction in the Bible? If Jesus was the main actor; the prophesied
saviour; and the ultimate reason for the whole collection of books in theBible, is it not strange that we only come across his name at such a late
stage?
Most of my life I have held a maverick admiration for Jesus Christ,
inspired by the message, but confused by its origins. I must admit that my
naïve admiration was repeatedly derailed by preachers of different shades
of grey. My personal belief is that popular religion has taken a very
simplistic message of love and goodwill among humanity, and hijacked it
for their own devious abuse. And as I dug deeper, I unearthed information
which forced me to rethink my naïve outlook on the whole debate around
Jesus. One by one my suspicions were confirmed, that there must have
been an ageless devious plot behind the carefully crafted ministry of
Christ. Just like Abraham, Jesus became an unwitting ‘mouthpiece’ for
his bloodthirsty Nefilim god, preparing the ground for the continued
enslavement of humanity. Doing great deeds among men, rounding up the
flock for salvation, showing them the way to reach the gates of god,
unconsciously weaving the propaganda of a power-hungry Anunnaki god.
The fact that Jesus was a man, we cannot deny. The fact that he lived and
travelled preaching his gospel is an historic fact. But who his real parents
were, what his bloodline was, who orchestrated his appearance on Earth
and who actually plotted all the prophecies about Jesus for thousands of
years, have taken on a whole new slant. There is emerging evidence that
the prophesied appearance of Christ is much more sinister than we could
ever have imagined. The uncanny parallels between the murky origins of
humanity, compared to the origins of Christ, point to the real possibility
that whoever crafted humanity, followed it up with a second wave of
premeditated, calculated propaganda and ultimate control. A control
mechanism that was planned and executed with pinpoint precision like a
military manoeuvre. As I pointed out, the one truly puzzling feature is the
lack of reference to the messiah in the Old Testament. The word
‘messiah’ first appears in John 1:41; and ‘Saviour’ first appears in
Deuteronomy 32:15. It leads me to believe that the idea of sending a
‘saviour’ to Earth as ‘the son of god’ was an idea that was only devised
much later, towards the end of the Old Testament, by Enlil or Marduk and
their ‘angels’, when they realised that the violent, oppressive approachtowards humans needed a facelift. They became aware that after
thousands of years of evolution, humans had evolved substantially and
had grown wiser, not always prepared to submit to the brutality of their
Anunnaki gods. It meant that the gods needed to revise their plan and
devise a new twist. And so they did. It was crafted like a movie script,
and a very good one I may add. So good in fact, that after 2,000 years,
billions of loyal faithfuls are still reading the script with absolute
devotion, ready to strike down anyone who dares attack their holy
dinosaur. We must examine some of the strange behaviour and
relationships between Jesus and his god, to highlight these peculiar
underlying signs of tension between the two entities. We mentioned
earlier that history books are written by the victors, and in the struggle
between Enlil, Enki and Marduk, it was also the case. Unfortunately for
humanity, the struggle between the sibling Nefilim gods was won by the
nasty one, Enlil. The one who did not like humanity. Did he masterfully
craft his dominion as ‘god’ of humanity? The victorious Enlil took
control of such matters as recording human activities and controlling
man's destiny in writing. His mission was simple. Keep humanity
uneducated, ignorant and stupid. Take control of their fears, keep them
loyal and obedient. Demonstrate your power and superiority over them
every so often, to keep them fearful. The vengeful yet loving god, who
will reward those who obey quietly and don't ask too many questions. In
the early days of the Bible, when Abraham was weaned by Enlil to be his
favourite among the leaders, Marduk was given the land of Egypt to
control. Marduk was know as Ra, Re and Amun among the Egyptians. To
create a large following of his own, Enlil ‘chose’ the Israelites as his
“chosen” people and rescued them from slavery, under Marduk's control.
This was a huge victory for Enlil with which he earned eternal loyalty
among the Hebrews and established himself as the god of Israel. Enlil
promised his followers the “land of milk and honey”, but in the process
they would have to vanquish a number of other peoples, who undoubtedly
were supporters of Marduk, and were not among god's favourites.
Enlil also held rank over Enki, which meant he could basically do what
he wanted with Enki's human creation. The disagreement between Enkiand Enlil, which had started way back in the Garden of Eden, played a
cardinal part in all of the scriptures of the Bible, including the prophesies
which were made. We explore this in greater detail in other chapters,
exposing how Enki was labelled the ‘serpent and devil’ and man was
forbidden to consort with him. The plan was so superbly imposed on
humanity, that it will forever hold the top spot in the annals of human
manipulation and propaganda. It may take centuries more of religious
bloodshed for humans to come to terms with reality. Enki was the ‘good
guy’. But history is written by the victors and the real story was
masterfully covered up by history books of which the Bible is the main
culprit, because it was controlled by the victorious Enlil, who proclaimed
himself god. But as time marches on and we discover new truths about
our ancient prehistory and our possible origins, we learn that Enki was
the architect of Adam and he loved his creation. He tried on many
occasions to elevate humanity, to teach them, to inform them, but Enlil
would not allow the slave species to become a threat to him and their
settlement here on Earth. This is the strong underlying message seeping
out between the pages of the Bible today. After the longest period of
human enslavement, the real truth is starting to shine through. The
incredible revelations in the recently released Lost Book of Enki by
Zecharia Sitchin provide us with much supportive evidence for the
everlasting plot, and it presents some answers to the chasms in our very
one-sided history books.
When I first started to read this incredible book, I felt as if I had
stumbled upon the holy grail itself. Words cannot describe the feelings of
conflict playing with your mind when you start to absorb the content of
those ancient clay tablets and compare them to what we have been told
for so many years. The inspiring thing is that the tablets that have been
unearthed, translated and which you can now read, are the result of
decades of work by people like Sitchin and many others. It is truly a
surreal experience to read 4,000 and 5,000-year-old scriptures in clay.
The beauty about these is that you cannot erase words with whitener; you
cannot go back and change the odd word; it's very hard to fake it. These
tablets reveal things about our human origins and support all the theoriesthat I have postulated in this book about our human ancestry. By bringing
these facts to life in an uncomplicated fashion, it also supports the
horrible theory that we have been manipulated into submission from the
very first day of our existence. Ask yourself this question. How many
people who study and preach the Bible have ever seen the original
biblical documents, as they were written in ancient times? The percentage
will be minuscule. Here we have a discovery from the days of Abraham,
perfectly preserved in clay, delivering a serious message to humanity,
while turning on its head everything we have ever been taught. Suddenly
the ‘lord’ is the devil, and the devil is our maker. Are we going to believe
it… Or discard it? Since we have dealt with much of the finger-wagging
of the Old Testament, let us look at a few very important technicalities
surrounding the scriptures of the New Testament.
The recorded events surrounding the birth of Jesus are highly
suspicious. The extremely questionable historic entries have never been
able to concur on the time, place and town in which Jesus was born. Even
the date of his birth differs from publication to publication. It has been
penned from 1BC to 7BC and the presentations by historians and
theologians seem to constantly clash. The fascinating thing about this
subject is that when you speak about Jesus, son of Joseph and Mary, you
deal in historic realms, which have a host of vigilant custodians. But the
moment you say ‘Jesus the Son of God’ you enter the world of religious
dogma, which has a host of rather militant custodians of its own. But it
seems that Jesus was not the only victim in this covert human
mismanagement. Equally convincing evidence shows that the Prophet
Muhammad and even the Buddha were also misused by the devious Enlil
to enslave humanity through religious fear. I kid you not. This is too
much to handle for the strongest of character, so I suggest you put aside
every ounce of everything you ever believed in, and prepare to digest
some liberating facts.
Many people have this image of Jesus, strolling around the
countryside, preaching to people, moving happy-go-luckily from town to
town, being welcomed by happy smiling people cheering him on, all
wanting to hear the amazing stories he has been telling all over the place.Well, that was not the case. Jesus was not really well liked in his time. It
took a lot of effort to get people to risk all kinds of possible danger to
come and listen to his preaching. Strangely enough, there is very little
evidence that anything he said and did, was actually ever captured during
his short three-year span as a prophet. With the possible exception of the
‘Sermon on the Mount’, it seems that most of the material written about
Jesus was done so only after his death by his disciples, apostles and some
other interesting characters. These were collected into a body of literary
work known as the New Testament over a period of about 300 years. The
'editing' of the New Testament only began in the year 325 AD, which
consisted of deletions and changes which were made and approved by
special church councils. This highly secretive manipulation continued
until the 12th century. I find this a little suspicious, don't you? What could
have taken them so long to edit and change if this was all the ‘Word of
God’? Clearly they had different ideas and they disagreed with much of
what was written, those church councils. Either they had their own ideas
of what the New Testament should contain or they were directed by
someone! Surely there must have been some mastermind behind this
whole process? It could not possibly have continued for 800 odd years
without an ever-present controlling force. And yes, you can say that ‘it
was the power of god’ because it seems that it was indeed the case.
However, it was ‘god’ with a small ‘g’ not ‘God’ with a big ‘G’who
directed the editing process, and therein lies the rub. The priests and high
priests among humans were instated by the Anunnaki-Nefilim as far as
5000 years before Christ and the fear of ‘god-Enlil’ was dispersed among
humanity mainly by them. By the 12th century AD they were so well
established as the voice of the Nefilim, the voice of Enlil, the voice of
god, that nobody could out manoeuvre them. In one apparent sitting of
the Second Synod of Constantinople in 553 AD, the church editors
deleted all of Jesus' references to ‘reincarnation’ from the Bible. This was
an important part of Jesus' ministry and adhered to by his early followers.
It also points clearly to his youthful influences while growing up in the
East, absorbing the many different cultures of the Hindus and Buddhists.What's more, in the 12th century, the Lateran Council added the concept
of the ‘holy trinity’ into the Bible, an idea which was apparently never
promoted by Jesus. This ‘holy trinity’ idea was doing the rounds since the
first Council of Nicaea in 325 AD, when the trouble with Aryans caused
much heated argument about the validity of Christ. Early in the 4 th
century, a dispute erupted among the Christian leaders regarding the
exact relationship of the ‘Son to the Father’. A priest by the name of
Arius of Alexandria, taught that there was a time when Christ did not
exist because he was not co-eternal with the Father. He further said that
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit were three separate and distinct
entities and that the ‘Son’ who was subordinate to the ‘Father’, was in
fact a ‘creature’. These teachings were condemned and Arius was
excommunicated in 318 AD.
As early as the 2nd century, Irenaeus of Lyons described the Holy Spirit
and Jesus as “the two hands of God”. Irenaeus gave us a hint of what
could be the functions of the other ‘parts of God’, when he intimated that
“through the Holy Spirit, God worked creation and through Jesus, He
worked redemption”. The word ‘Trinity’or Trinitas was most likely
coined by Tertullian in the 3 rd century, in his extensive writing on the
issue. Another Christian father called Origen, carried the doctrine further
but neither assigned full consubstantiality of the Holy Spirit with God. At
the gathering in Nicaea, the council formulated a creed which, although it
was revised at the Council of Constantinople in 381-82 AD, has become
known as the Nicene Creed. It affirmed the doctrine of‘consubstantiality’
of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
In his book On the Trinity St. Augustine concluded that the Holy Spirit
is the mutual love of the ‘Father for the Son’ and of the ‘Son for the
Father’, while the Holy Spirit is derived from both the Father and the
Son. He also wrote that the Holy Spirit is a gift to humanity from the
Father and the Son. This explanation still did not clarify the function of
the Holy Spirit and how it came about and its role remained a mystery.
The other problem that remained was how to explain the nature of
Jesus. Everyone accepted that Jesus was human, so how could he also be‘God’? With heretical views spreading and the Aryans promoting a
different doctrine, something had to be done. This was one of the main
reasons why the councils of Nicaea and Constantinople were set up. To
stop the impending and massive division in the Church and to ostracise
perceived heresy. It was not surprising that the majority of the Bishops
rallied behind Bishop Athanasius in affirming that Jesus was
consubstantial with the Father in contrast to the views of Arius and his
followers who maintained that Jesus could not be ‘one with God’and that
he was a ‘creature’. And so, Emperor Constantine put his foot down,
Arius and his supporters were expelled, and the Nicene Creed was passed
which affirmed the consubstantiality of Jesus with God. In 451 AD at the
council of Chalcedon, Pope Leo I proposed a solution to the riddle of God
and Jesus. He declared that they were “one person in two natures”. As far
as the fathers were concerned, his miracles, his conduct and his words
were evidence that he was Divine. This ‘formula’was a great relief to the
new young religion, and the bishops could go to their parishes, satisfied
that they had solved a problem that had plagued theology for decades.
What this all really means, is that the Christian Church had complete
freedom to hack the original writings to pieces, formulating the New
Testament as they liked, adding whatever they believed to be necessary
for human spiritual consumption and deleting entire books which did not
meet their image of the Bible. Fortunately, many of the deleted books
were saved and compiled into a collection of writings called The
Apocrypha. In essence, those books which were deemed to be of dubious
content by the church. Once again this points to gross manipulation by a
higher authority with more sinister plans. According to the Wikipedia,
the definition of Apocrypha is something like this. “The word apocrypha,
from the Greek word meaning ‘hidden’, refers in general to religious
works that are not considered canonical, or part of officially accepted
scripture, but are of very roughly similar style and age as the accepted
scriptures. Such works are often believed not to have been “inspired” or
to be in some way “less inspired” by divine processes or entities, such as
Holy Wisdom or the Holy Spirit. Most works that are considered
apocryphal in the Hebrew Bible were written in languages other thanHebrew, such as Greek or Aramaic, or at least survive only as translations
into non-Hebrew languages.”
You must keep in mind that Jesus never wrote any of the books in the
Bible. They were all written about him by various characters mostly after
his death. I highly recommend you look into the Apocrypha on the
internet; there are so many fascinating pieces to read, it will make your
mind boggle. One of the books omitted from the Bible was the story of
Jesus' birth and childhood years, up to the point when he returned to his
land of birth to start his ministry. This discarded book did not agree with
the official version which the church wanted to present to the world. Once
you read the ‘hidden’ story, the evidence of human manipulation by a
higher power is difficult to refute. There are fascinating books like Mary,
Infancy and Protovangelion just to name a few.
According to the Apocrypha, the birth of Christ goes something like
this. His grandfather Joachim was a priest in the Hebrew temple, who was
highly embarrassed because he and his wife Anna, could not produce any
children. A man in his position was expected to have an heir, which left
the couple slightly embarrassed. While standing in the field one day an
‘angel’ appeared to him, glowing with bright white light. After calming
the frightened Joachim, he said that his wife would bear a child aided by
an ‘angel’. But they would have to surrender the child to be raised by
priests and ‘angels’ at a certain temple in Jerusalem. Lo and behold, Anna
gave birth to a daughter called Mary, who at the age of three was taken to
the temple and left there. Mary was an exemplary child, devoted to both
priests and ‘angels’. By the age of around 14, the time came for her to go
back into the world and get married. She was not allowed to choose a
man, her mentors handpicked a much older man called Joseph to be her
husband. But Joseph was not as willing as the ‘angels’ would have had it
and it took some convincing to do it. After finally agreeing to the
marriage, he went back to his home in Bethlehem to prepare his home for
his new wife, while Mary went to her parents in Galilee to get ready for
her new life. One day an ‘angel’ called Gabriel appeared to Mary and told
her that she would give birth to the new messiah. Mary was confused as
she had never had a sexual experience before.There are many theories and explanations regarding the virgin birth.
Regardless of what your personal beliefs are, it was supposed to be the
‘Holy Ghost’ who ‘came upon her’ therefore making the child holy,
because the child was not conceived in lust. Whatever happened to Mary
will forever remain a mystery, but there were a lot of ‘angels’ milling
around during those times and we have a sneaky suspicion who those
angels were; Enlil and his henchmen. If Enlil was delivering the final
stroke to his masterful control over humanity, he would have wanted to
ensure some form of genetic supremacy for his fabricated messiah. This
would have included artificial insemination of the young virgin, for the
purpose of giving young Jesus a distinct genetic advantage. Such a simple
procedure would have undoubtedly given Jesus abilities which other
humans did not possess. His life of miracles and healing attests to that.
We must also keep in mind that the whole idea of sex, whether for fun or
for procreation, was pronounced to be a sinful act. That is why all humans
are said to be born in sin. This was another very good example of how
‘god’ wanted to control the procreation of the slave species. Barbara
Thiering writes extensively about the habits of the Essenes and their
rituals in the stronghold of Qumran. In her book Jesus The Man, she
presents a slightly different explanation for the virgin birth, which
revolves around culture and custom.
According to Thiering, when Joseph returned from Bethlehem to
collect his young wife Mary, he found her pregnant. He was obviously
confused and somewhat alarmed, believing that Mary had become a
whore. Before he could desert her, an angel appeared to him explaining
that Mary was still a virgin. It must have been a very convincing angel,
because Joseph stayed with Mary in Galilee until her 9th month of
pregnancy, at which point they departed for Joseph's home in Bethlehem,
where Mary would have the child. But the couple did not make it all the
way home because Mary went into labour on the outskirts of the town.
The only shelter they could find was a cave, in which Jesus was born. The
Apocrypha book of Infancy describes it as such:
Infancy 1:6-11“And when they came to the cave Mary confessed to Joseph that her
time of giving birth had come, and she could not go on to the city,
and said, let us go into the cave. At that time the sun was nearly
down. But Joseph hurried away so that he might fetch her a midwife;
and when he saw an old Hebrew woman who was from Jerusalem, he
said to her, please come here, good woman, and go into that cave,
and you will see a woman just ready to give birth. It was after sunset
when the old woman and Joseph reached the cave, and they both
went into it. And look, it was all filled with lights, greater than the
light of lamps and candle, and greater of than the light of the sun
itself. The infant was then wrapped in swaddling clothes, and
sucking on the breast of his mother, St. Mary.”
The bright light in the cave suggests some sort of more advanced
technology, which cannot be explained. It goes hand in hand with other
advanced phenomena surrounding the birth of Christ, like the star of
Bethlehem. Over the years various explanations for the bright star have
been proposed, which include the convergence of a number of stars and
planets at that time. There is no doubt that such conjunctions did occur in
the years of Christ's birth, but it is highly unlikely that it was a mere
conjunction which would have caused the effect as described in the book
of Protovangelion 15 : 7.
“We saw an extraordinarily large star shining among the stars of heaven,
and so outshined all the other stars, that they became not visible…”
There is no planet or star or comet or conjunction of the above, which
could possibly be so bright. The star of Bethlehem was described in much
greater splendour. It not only shone so incredibly brightly that it made all
the other stars invisible, but it actually guided the Three Wise Men
(Magi) for a long way towards the infant, hovering some distance ahead
of them. The story in the apocrypha continues as such.
“So the wise men began their travel, and look, the star which they
saw in the east went before them, until it came and stood over the
cave, where the young child was with Mary his mother.”
(Protovangelion 15:9)But this uncanny story does not end here. After their exchange with Mary
and the infant Jesus, the star then guided the wise men all the way home,
back to the East. “… the light of which they followed until they returned
in to their own country.” (Infancy 3:3)
The Bible version is quite similar in this instance, but it does differ on the
venue. It clearly states that Jesus was born in a house. Is this evidence of
the so-called editing which the various church councils conducted? They
obviously felt that a cave was no place for the future messiah to be born.
Matthew 2:9-13
“After they had heard the king, they went on their way, and the star
they had seen in the east went ahead of them until it stopped over the
place where the child was. When they saw the star, they were
overjoyed. On coming to the house, they saw the child with his
mother Mary, and they bowed down and worshipped him. Then they
opened their treasures and presented him with gifts of gold and of
incense and of myrrh. And having been warned in a dream not to go
back to Herod, they returned to their country by another route.”
The Escape to Egypt
“When they had gone, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a
dream. ‘Get up,’ he said, ‘take the child and his mother and escape
to Egypt. Stay there until I tell you, for Herod is going to search for
the child to kill him.’”
This is really fascinating stuff in light of our theory that Enlil and his
cronies were planning and manipulating all these events. Once again,
when there are eminent signs of trouble, we have the presence of angels –
this time in a dream warning both the wise men and Joseph. These subtle
but important events show how incredibly well-thought-out this
manipulative propaganda was. How do you create a hero very quickly
even today? You stage an assassination attempt on his life, but against all
odds, he escapes to tell the tale. This time it was the Three Wise Men
who were brought a long way to help spread the news across the then
‘civilised’ world about the ‘true’ messiah who was born and whose lifewas already under threat by the nervous authorities. We should not be
surprised at the brilliant strategy behind all this. The CIA and other
secretive government departments are constantly engaged in similar
manipulative acts involving their citizens. This just goes to show how
much of that Nefilim DNA we inherited. And so, the word went out in an
instant that the ‘messiah’ was born. After all, they had all the
substantiation. The king had heard of him and wanted him dead. So it had
to be the messiah! The coincidence that the wise men were from the East
and the fact that Jesus spent most of his life after birth in the East
learning the cultures and enlightenment is fascinating. The fact that Jesus
was of the Essene Hebrew clan, became clear after the discovery of the
Dead Sea Scrolls in a cave in 1947, by a young Bedouin tribesman.
Joseph and Jesus were both Essenes, which was a unique Hebrew
religious sect, with very different traditions. They also had very strong
links to the Aryans of Persia, and that is why The Three Wise Men or
Magi, came to see the newborn child from such a long distance away. It
appears that the Essenes had all the trimmings of a secret society. It took
several years of initiation before one was admitted; as part of the official
initiation you had to swear to protect all the secret teachings of the
Essene Order; and most intriguingly you had to keep secretive the names
of ‘angels’ living among them and their communities.
Barbara Thiering's version of the virgin birth of Jesus is a little
different. From her extensive study of the ‘Scrolls’ she explains that
Joseph, as an Essene, was practising his religious principles of celibacy in
a temple stronghold called Qumran. Celibacy was very important to the
Essenes, it was regarded as the holiest way of life. They saw marriage and
sex as unholy and the more celibate you were the closer to god you got.
The ‘highest’ order of Essenes men lived in Qumran behind thick walls
completely out of touch with the world. They shared everything and
owned nothing while dedicating their lives to god. When they needed to
procreate to keep the bloodline alive, they would venture out for specific
periods to find an appropriate female. The courting or betrothal period
could last as long as three years after which they would have a first
marriage. This was the period during which the woman would fallpregnant. After waiting for three months during which a miscarriage is
more likely to happen, there would be a 2nd wedding. But our Mary fell
pregnant with the ‘holy ghost’ which according to the tradition meant that
she was effectively still a ‘virgin’ because when she had the child she had
not had both the weddings. At first Joseph did not want to have anything
to do with the child, but an ‘angel’ advised him to go ahead with the
wedding as if it was the second.
The Essenes believed that priests and Levites were incarnations of
heavenly beings or ‘gods’ and ‘angels’. The fact that Joseph did not have
sex with Mary after their first wedding and yet she fell pregnant, made
her a virgin. Joseph fell into a lower rank of priests and kings which made
him a ‘spirit’. And so the mystery of the baby being conceived by the
‘holy spirit’ is answered by Joseph's lower rank. Although the latter
version is interesting, I find it almost too complicated, while the story of
t he Apocrypha has simplicity in its favour. William Bramley exposes
much evidence which outlines Jesus' Essene lineage while also linking it
to the secret societies like the Brotherhood and Freemasons who also
happen to use a symbolic ‘apron’.
The lack of information about the young Jesus' life is disturbing.
Shouldn't the messiah have been the idol of humanity as he was growing
up, spreading truth and wisdom even at a young age? Surely, that would
have been the obvious thing to do, if you really wanted to impress people
everywhere? But that was not the case. Instead, Jesus was whisked off to
a faraway land, where he was prepared and most likely indoctrinated for
the big role in the great human deception. He briefly appeared at the age
of 12 before a group of Hebrew scholars but then he disappeared for
another 18 years. The Anunnaki gods were too well known around the
Near East, Israel and Egypt. Enlil had to find a more discrete location for
the grooming of his protégé. By the age of around 30, Jesus reappeared
out of the blue to start his short life of ministry, lasting only an incredible
three years before his crucifixion. Just think about this practically. In
today's world of extreme wealth and mass media, it would be very
difficult to create a global brand within three years. And yet, in only threeshort years 2,000 years ago, one man became a global phenomenon? The
PR around his activities and the way in which his awareness spread, lead
me to believe that there were very powerful forces like the Anunnaki
gods behind such a masterstroke. But Jesus was not such a big hit in his
time as we are led to believe. It actually took 2,000 years to make Jesus
the phenomenon he is today, because at the time of his life he had a small
following and caused much upheaval with his preaching. If it was not for
Emperor Constantine some 300 years after Christ's death, Christianity
would most likely have remained a small cultish religion.
A substantial number of historians have unravelled a fascinating
history of the young Jesus in Persia and Asia which is too detailed to be a
fabrication or coincidence. They are not like the predictable stories which
state that he worked with his father in the carpentry workshop. If that was
the case, who was responsible for his spiritual and philosophical
education, and why did we not hear about him at all during those years? It
is highly unlikely that he would have gone unnoticed if he was around the
Nazareth area all his life. The local custom dictated that Essene boys
entered a monastery at about the age of five where they received the
appropriate education. Some historians claim that this was exactly what
happened to young Jesus, at a monastery on the Mediterranean sea near
Haifa. The reason why Jesus seemed to have made a short appearance in
the New Testament at the age of 12, was for his bar mitzvah preparation,
after which he mysteriously vanished for another 18 years. Historians and
documentary makers have done extensive work on the hidden life of the
young Christ. Many of them agree that Jesus spent the time travelling
through Asia absorbing the religious principles of their spiritual leaders.
Those travels by Christ were probably sponsored by the Essenes as their
religious culture was deeply rooted in the Aryan and Zoroaster religions
which originated from the East. Ancient Buddhist scrolls reveal that Jesus
spent seventeen years in India and Tibet from the age of thirteen to age
twenty nine. He was both a student and teacher of Buddhist and Hindu
holy men. The story of his journey from Jerusalem to Benares was
recorded by Brahman historians, who until today still know him and love
him as St. Issa, their ‘Buddha’. This was revealed in 1894 when a Russiandoctor and explorer by the name of Nicolas Notovitch published a book
called The Unknown Life of Christ. Notovitch journeyed extensively
throughout Afghanistan, India, and further through the spectacular passes
of Bolan, over the Punjab, down into the arid rocky land of Ladakh, and
into the majestic Vale of Kashmir of the Himalayas. During one of his
journeys in 1890 he was visiting Leh, the capital of Ladakh, near where
the Buddhist monastery of Himis is located. Because of an accident in
which he broke his leg, he had the opportunity to stay for some time at
Himis. While he was there, he learnt that the Buddhists had ancient
records of the life of Jesus Christ. Notovitch was stunned, and with some
scratching he located a Tibetan translation of the legend and carefully
noted in his ‘carnet de voyage’ over two hundred verses from the curious
document known as The Life of St. Issa. He learnt that ‘Issa’ is the direct
translation of the name ‘Jesus’ which is also used by many Muslims
today. He was shown two large yellowed volumes containing the
biography of St. Issa. Notovitch enlisted a member of his party to
translate the Tibetan volumes while he carefully noted each verse in the
back pages of his journal. When he returned to the Western world there
was much controversy as to the authenticity of the document. He was
accused of creating a hoax and was ridiculed as an impostor. In his
defence, he encouraged a scientific expedition to prove that the original
Tibetan documents really existed. One of his sceptics was a Hindu monk
and a disciple of Sri Ramakrishna called Swami Abhedananda. In 1922,
Swami Abhedananda, journeyed to Ladakh in hopes of exposing
Notovitch as a fraud. Upon questioning the head lama about St. Issa, he
was shown a manuscript which he recorded in his travel notes. He was
astounded to find a manuscript of Bengali translation of two hundred
twenty-four verses virtually identical to what Notovitch had written.
Abhedananda was thus convinced of the authenticity of the Issa legend.
While on a trek through central Asia during 1925, Nicholas Roerich,
the artist-philosopher, also encountered the infamous manuscript. One of
the many reasons for Roerich's trek was to record customs and legends of
the peoples of central Asia. He published two of his diaries called Heart
of Asia and Altai-Himalaya which both contain such tales of St. Issa.Roerich says that more important than the find of the manuscripts itself is
the cultural phenomenon of the spread of Jesus' legend to these ‘remote’
regions. He writes the following in Altai-Himalaya concerning this:
“Whoever doubts too completely that such legends about the Christ
life exist in Asia, probably does not realize what an immense
influence the Nestorians have had in all parts of Asia and how many
so-called Apocryphal legends they spread in the most ancient times
... Many remember lines from the book of Notovitch, but it is still
more wonderful to discover, on this site, in several variants, the
same version of the legend of Issa. The local people knew nothing of
any published book but they know the legend and with deep
reverence they speak of Issa. One might wonder what relation
Moslems, Hindus, or Buddhists have with Issa. But it is still more
significant to see how vital are great ideas and how they penetrate
even the most remote places. Never may one discover the source of
such legends. But even if they originated from ancient Nestorian
Apocrypha, at present it is instructive to see the widespread and deep
consideration paid to the subject. It is significant to hear a local
inhabitant, a Hindu, relate how Issa preached beside a small pool
near the bazaar under a tree, which no longer exists. In such purely
physical indications you may see how seriously this subject is
regarded.
(Roerich: Altai-Himalaya, pp. 89-90)
According to the Buddhist legends, Issa arrived in Asia at the age of
about 13, studied under various masters, absorbing much knowledge
while engaging in some preaching of his own. The document further
states that the ‘blessed one’ then returned to Palestine some 16 years later
at the age of 29. This fits the mysterious life of Jesus like a glove and
since there aren't any other similar coincidences that we know of, it
certainly sounds like Jesus was a well-travelled and well-learned man by
the time he began his world-changing ministry in Palestine. The ‘Legend
of Issa’ further strengthens the Essene and Aryan link when it states that:“In his fourteenth year, young Issa, the Blessed One, came this side
of the Sindh and settled among the Aryas (Aryans)…”
Sindh was a province of western Pakistan and Aryas was their term for
Aryan. The legend goes that Jesus studied under the white Aryan
Brahman Priests who were overjoyed by his arrival. “The white priest of
Brahma welcomed him joyfully,” states the legend. He was taught to read
and to understand the Vedas, and also how to teach and expound these
Hindu scriptures. But Jesus started to show his true colours very early in
life when he disregarded culture and began to associate with the lower
castes. He protested against their discriminatory practices and questioned
why God would make any difference in his children. The Sudras (people
of the lower castes) were not only forbidden to attend the reading of the
Vedas, but they were even forbidden to look on them, for they were
condemned to perpetual servitude as slaves to the Brahmins, the
Kshatriyas and even the Vaishyas who were of higher caste levels. Jesus
strongly disagreed with their philosophy and openly questioned their
morality.
“God has made no difference between his children, who are all alike
dear to him,” said Issa. Disregarding their words, Issa remained with the
Sudras, preaching against the Brahmins and Kshatriyas. “Those who
deprive their brethren of divine happiness shall be deprived of it
themselves. The Brahmans and the Kshatriyas shall become the Sudras,
and with the Sudras the Eternal shall dwell everlastingly.” (Notovitch,
5:23) Please note that some historians spell the word Shudras as Sudras.
There is also a different spelling for Vaishyas and Vaishas.
Issa's teachings in Asia are astounding as they mirror the words of
Jesus some years later. Take a look at some of the things he had to say,
long before the people of the Holy Land got to hear his words of wisdom.
“... He passed his time in several ancient cities of India such as
Benares. All loved him because Issa dwelt in peace with Vaishas and
Shudras whom he instructed and helped. But the Brahmins and
Kshatriyas told him that Brahma forbade those to approach who
were created out of his womb and feet. The Vaishas were allowed tolisten to the Vedas only on holidays and the Shudras were forbidden
not only to be present at the reading of the Vedas, but could not even
look at them.
Issa said that man had filled the temples with his abominations. In
order to pay homage to metals and stones, man sacrificed his fellows
in whom dwells a spark of the Supreme Spirit. Man demeans those
who labour by the sweat of their brows, in order to gain the good
will of the sluggard who sits at the lavishly set board. But they who
deprive their brothers of the common blessing shall be themselves
stripped of it.
Vaishas and Shudras were struck with astonishment and asked what
they could perform. Issa bade them ‘Worship not the idols. Do not
consider yourself first. Do not humiliate your neighbour. Help the
poor. Sustain the feeble. Do evil to no one. Do not covet that which
you do not possess and which is possessed by others.’
Many, learning of such words, decided to kill Issa. But Issa,
forewarned, departed from this place by night.
Afterward, Issa went into Nepal and into the Himalayan mountains
....
‘Well, perform for us a miracle,’ demanded the servitors of the
Temple. Then Issa replied to them: ‘Miracles made their appearance
from the very day when the world was created. He who cannot
behold them is deprived of the greatest gift of life. But woe to you,
enemies of men, woe unto you, if you await that He should attest his
power by miracle.’
Issa taught that men should not strive to behold the Eternal Spirit
with one's own eyes but to feel it with the heart, and to become a
pure and worthy soul.... Not only shall you not make human
offerings, but you must not slaughter animals, because all is given
for the use of man. Do not steal the goods of others, because that
would be usurpation from your near one. Do not cheat, that you may
in turn not be cheated .... Beware, ye, who divert men from the true
path and who fill the people with superstitions and prejudices, who
blind the vision of the seeing ones, and who preach subservience tomaterial things.”
“Then Pilate, ruler of Jerusalem, gave orders to lay hands upon the
preacher Issa and to deliver him to the judges, without however,
arousing the displeasure of the people.
But Issa taught: ‘Do not seek straight paths in darkness, possessed
by fear. But gather force and support each other. He who supports
his neighbour strengthens himself. I tried to revive the laws of
Moses in the hearts of the people. And I say unto you that you do not
understand their true meaning because they do not teach revenge but
forgiveness. But the meaning of these laws is distorted.’
Then the ruler sent to Issa his disguised servants that they should
watch his actions and report to him about his words to the people.
‘Thou just man,’ said the disguised servant of the ruler of Jerusalem
approaching Issa, ‘Teach us, should we fulfil the will of Caesar or
await the approaching deliverance?’
But Issa, recognizing the disguised servants, said, ‘I did not foretell
unto you that you would be delivered from Caesar; but I said that the
soul which was immersed in sin would be delivered from sin.’
At this time, an old woman approached the crowd, but was pushed
back. Then Issa said, ‘Reverence Woman, mother of the universe,’ in
her lies the truth of creation. She is the foundation of all that is good
and beautiful. She is the source of life and death. Upon her depends
the existence of man, because she is the sustenance of his labours.
She gives birth to you in travail, she watches over your growth.
Bless her. Honour her. Defend her. Love your wives and honour
them, because tomorrow they shall be mothers, and later-progenitors
of a whole race. Their love ennobles man, soothes the embittered
heart and tames the beast. Wife and mother-they are the adornments
of the universe.’
‘As light divides itself from darkness, so does woman possess the
gift to divide in man good intent from the thought of evil. Your best
thoughts must belong to woman. Gather from them your moral
strength, which you must possess to sustain your near ones. Do nothumiliate her, for therein you will humiliate yourselves. And all
which you will do to mother, to wife, to widow or to another woman
in sorrow - that shall you also do for the Spirit.’ So taught Issa; but
the ruler Pilate ordered one of his servants to make accusation
against him.
Said Issa: ‘Not far hence is the time when by the Highest Will the
people will become purified and united into one family.’”
(Roerich)
It is fascinating to see that Jesus came face to face with some of the
deities or angels who ruled the East. “Near Lhasa was a temple of
teaching with a wealth of manuscripts. Jesus was to acquaint himself with
them. Meng-ste, a great sage of all the East, was in this temple.”
This behaviour caused so much friction, that a group of white priests
sent some servants to kill Issa. He was however warned against the plot
and escaped to the holy city of Djagguernat and further into Buddhist
lands. Jesus stayed there for six years learning the Pali language and the
holy Buddhist writings called ‘Sutras’. The legend goes that Jesus “could
perfectly expound the sacred scrolls.”
This kind of teaching flies right in the face of the ‘god of vengeance’in
the Old Testament where god would choose his favourite group of people
over another. It was the rebellious Jesus who began to preach in earnest
that ‘all men are equal’. This was a brilliant piece of strategy by the god
Enlil, who was setting up the young messiah for the biggest day in human
religion, the crucifixion.
But even before Jesus returned to Palestine he preached and performed
miracles among the people of Asia, even raising some from the dead.
This is another excerpt from Roerich's translations of the Legend of St
Issa.
“Finally Jesus reached a mountain pass and in the chief city of
Ladakh, Leh, he was joyously accepted by monks and people of the
lower class .... And Jesus taught in the monasteries and in the
bazaars (the market places); wherever the simple people gathered,there he taught. Not far from this place lived a woman whose son
had died and she brought him to Jesus. And in the presence of a
multitude, Jesus laid his hand on the child, and the child rose healed.
And many brought their children and Jesus laid his hands upon them,
healing them. Among the Ladakhis, Jesus passed many days,
teaching them. And they loved him and when the time of his
departure came they sorrowed as children.”
By the time Jesus returned to Palestine he was 29-30 years old and
immediately started his public life of ministry. The relationship between
him and his Essenes sponsors was showing great signs of distress, mainly
because of his lack of respect for their Aryan brethren in Asia. The
Essenes had a lot of time and money invested in Jesus and they were keen
to have him proclaimed the new ‘messiah’, but Jesus wanted nothing to
do with it. According to some historians, he denied his Davidic descent
and even forbade his disciples to call him the ‘messiah’, which is another
perfect example of how the principle of 'divide and conquer' was being
implemented by the cunning Enlil. While some writers of books dealing
with the Anunnaki influence on human history believe that Jesus became
a rebel within the environment which was prepared for him by his
‘heavenly gods’, I have a slightly more sinister hypothesis. The most
important message we extract out of these activities is the masterful
precision with which Enlil, the supreme Anunnaki commander was
orchestrating the ‘messiah prophesies’. Day by day, step by step, he
manipulated events while setting Jesus up to be the martyr for humanity,
while he continually and unwittingly promoted the power of his ‘good’
god, Enlil, the one and only god. Together with the books of the Old
Testament they provide the irrefutable evidence of manipulation, control
and oppression of humanity from the dawn of history. There is simply no
other way to digest all the confusing and conflicting events of the distant
past. The only sensible answer lies in the well supported historic findings
which outline the arrival of the Anunnaki or Nefilim on Earth, which led
to a chain of events nobody could have ever predicted in their wildest
dreams.Adding to the confusion about a messiah, which was being spread by
the Anunnaki gods and ‘angels’ was the constant need displayed by the
people of the day to find this elusive messiah. Their desperation for a
saviour was so great that they willingly proclaimed Jesus to be the new
messiah, adding fuel to the fire. But once again the fuel was actually
being poured on by the Anunnaki ‘angels’ who were the real agitators,
spreading the word of the messiah to humans all over the place. Within
three short years, Jesus had made such waves and created so many
enemies, that neither the Hebrew leaders nor the Romans were too fond
of him. He was a real rebel, unconsciously creating a legacy which would
be masterfully crafted by a controlled group of priests between about 325
AD and 1150 AD, into the New Testament. A stunning conclusion to the
religious entrapment of the Old Testament, which needed to evolve into a
true human drama of unconditional love, faith and sacrifice of the New
Testament. By its conclusion, the god Enlil had set the eternal trap of
enslavement through religious dogma. A masterfully executed plot by the
vengeful god, whom humanity still fears today.
Enlil was the father of manipulation and propaganda. Towards the end
of the Old Testament he realised that humanity was growing increasingly
informed and civilised. The other lesser gods under the leadership of
Marduk, were causing confusion among people, causing them not to
know whom they should obey and worship. Remember that Marduk had
proclaimed himself ‘god above all’ and the rivalry between him and Enlil
was the main backdrop to the human drama of biblical times. But the
humans had evolved, their brains were functioning more intelligently and
they had great philosophers, mathematicians and teachers who were
uplifting humanity at a rapid rate. Very quickly, Enlil's control over
humans was slipping. He had to come up with a cunning plan to reaffirm
his supremacy, so that humanity would become fearful and obedient once
more. We must remember that by this time there was a whole new sub-
species of people called Homo sapiens sapiens or ‘Wise Wise Man’. This
newly evolved subspecies emerged very early in human history when “the
sons of God saw the daughters of man and had children with them” and
by doing so, immediately created a new hybrid human who was moreintelligent and more evolved. All signs point to the Aryans as the earliest
‘Wise-Wise’ humans. These hybrid humans became a huge threat to
Enlil, and remained a threat for long periods of time. We have already
pointed out how god and his bloodthirsty ‘angels’ tried to wipe out those
who conspired against him in Sodom and Gomorrah. This kind of
persecution carried on throughout the ages with numerous examples in
the Bible. At first Enlil tried to curtail such rebellious activity in various
oppressive ways but it failed. History has shown us that dictators do not
last forever. Eventually the people will rise up against their oppressor.
This is exactly what happened to Enlil. By the end of the Old Testament
days, he realised that a new strategy was necessary to re-establish total
control over humanity.
The ‘divide and conquer’ principle was successfully introduced, but
Enlil tested the process of religious entrapment on a few other occasions,
with other so-called prophets. It seems that the Anunnaki had been
planting seeds of messianic doctrine for quite some time, patiently
waiting for one of or more of the messiahs to take root. And boy, did
they! The Hebrew and Christian Bibles are filled with prophets but some
delivered less success than others. One such example is outlined in the
Book of Enoch one of the Apocryphal scriptures. Melchizedek was a
Jewish high priest with great influence in his time, who was also reported
to have been brought forth by a virgin birth by his old mother Soparim,
without human intercourse.
2 Enoch 71
“Soparim, old and barren, conceived Melchizedek without having
intercourse with her husband.”
Enoch writes that Soparim was not only post-menstrual but she had been
childless all of her life, when suddenly she fell pregnant on her own.
Although I have not read about the presence of any ‘angels’ in this
instance, I suspect they must have been present just like in all the other
virgin birth cases, making sure that the intended recipient was receptive
to the fertilisation process she was about to experience. Enoch must have
had some form of contact with the gods who used him as a mouthpiece toprophesy the coming of Melchizedek and another messiah, who would be
the most powerful of them all. By using random prophets in this fashion,
the gods created an expectation among humans of great heavenly things
and salvation from the toil on Earth. They were promised eternal life in
the house of god and other fantastical experiences. But only IF they
behaved and obeyed their god blindly at all times. It is mind-boggling
that since those days, nothing has really changed in popular global
religions, and the fear of punishment by god is possibly stronger now
than ever.
Enoch 71:34
“And afterward, in the last generation, there will be another
Melchizedek, the first of twelve priests. And this last will be head of
all, a great archpriest, the Word and power of God, who will perform
miracles greater and more glorious than all the previous ones.”
What a wonderfully deceptive promise to make to a confused community
of humans without any identity. The wonders do not end here though. The
Hindu tradition has many legends of wondrous human beings that are
conceived and born in strange and complex manners. Just take a look at
the Vedic poems. The Buddha was born from the womb unlike many of
the other Hindu gods. Once again there was a bright constellation that
signalled the miraculous birth of a great prophet and teacher. The
conception by his mother Maya was very peculiar during which she fell
into a deep trance in which a white king elephant seemed to enter her
body without causing her pain or discomfort. During her pregnancy Maya
did not experience any fatigue or depression. The legend surrounding the
conception and birth of the Buddha goes something like this:
“So he issued from the womb as befits a Buddha. He did not enter
the world in the usual manner, and he appeared like one descended
from the sky.”
Does this mean that the Buddha had Aryan features, like Enki and the
other Anunnaki gods? If so, who was his paternal father whose DNA he
inherited.“And since he had for many eons been engaged in the practice of
meditation, he now was born in full awareness, and not thoughtless
and bewildered as other people are. When born, he was so lustrous
and steadfast that it appeared as if the young sun had come down to
earth.”
Once again we witness a bright light or some other form of brilliance as
in the cave during the birth of Christ.
“And yet, when people gazed at his dazzling brilliance, he held their
eyes like the moon. His limbs shone with the radiant hue of precious
gold, and lit up the space all around. Instantly he walked seven steps,
firmly and with long strides. In that, he was like the constellation of
the Seven Seers. With the bearing of a lion he surveyed the four
quarters, and spoke these words full of meaning for the future: ‘For
enlightenment I was born, for the good of all that lives. This is the
last time that I have been born into this world of becoming.’”
(Conze, 1959.)
Based on various historic births of prophets, the people of Israel also
expect that the birth of the Messiah would be surrounded by miraculous
celestial signs, which would herald the beginning of the apocalypse when
god's chosen people would be taken up to heaven. The Jews also expect
the visitation of angels and wondrous occurrences to accompany the
conception of the Messiah, as it seems to have happened for hundreds of
years before. By the time Christ was born the Jews were desperate for a
messiah but they had pretty set ideas of what the messiah's job would
entail. It certainly did not fall in line with what Jesus started to preach on
his return from Asia. For a long time the Jews wanted a warrior messiah
to save them from their slavery and torment. They wanted to be told that
they were god's chosen people and that he had come to save them, not to
tell them that all people are equal in god's eyes, or to turn the other
cheek! But sadly for them, the message from the Old Testament had
suddenly changed dramatically and Jesus took upon himself the hopeless
situation of the ‘slave species’. He believed that he could teach them and‘really’ save them. Little did he know that there was a much bigger, and
more sinister plan by the Anunnaki which plotted his destiny. Once they
realised that this Jesus character was well established among a growing
loyal group of followers, they would stop at nothing to help elevate Jesus
to the highest level of divinity. A good example comes to us in Matthew
three after Jesus was baptised, the gods had to add a little spice to
entrench the moment in human history. Another incredible example of
how the gods interacted with Humankind. Wouldn't it be fascinating if
this kind of thing happened today? I wonder what CNN and BBC
journalists would make of it.
Matthew 3:16-17
“As soon as Jesus was baptized, he went up out of the water. At that
moment heaven was opened, and he saw the Spirit of God
descending like a dove and lighting on him. And a voice from
heaven said, ‘This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am well
pleased.’”
We begin to suspect that Jesus did not want to go through with his ordeal
when he realised what was going on. In the garden of Gethsemane he asks
the gods twice if he could ‘not drink from the cup’ basically meaning that
he wanted this ordeal to pass him by.
Matthew 26:38-42
“‘My soul is overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death.’… he
fell with his face to the ground and prayed, ‘My Father, if it is
possible, may this cup be taken from me…The spirit is willing, but
the body is weak.’ … He went away a second time and prayed, ‘My
Father, if it is not possible for this cup to be taken away unless I
drink it, may your will be done.’”
It is clear from these words that Jesus had lost his lust for this messianic
stuff. But a real moment of truth which reveals the terrible secret about
Jesus being manipulated, came on the cross just before he died. If he
really knew what was awaiting him, why would he say the following:
Matthew 27:46“About the ninth hour Jesus cried out in a loud voice, ‘Eloi, Eloi,
lama sabachthani?’ Which means, ‘My God, my God, why have you
forsaken me?’”
Why would Jesus suddenly feel that he had been let down, or forgotten?
Did he expect to be helped by someone? Surely he must have been aware
of his own fate and that he was going to stir the hatred of the authorities
who would not let him get away with such blatant anti-establishment
behaviour! If he was fully aware of the implications of his actions, why
would he expect his god to rescue him? After all Jesus was supposed to
be god personified in human form. Surely he knew he had to die for
humanity? Or maybe not! It is possible that the road which was laid out
for him by the higher powers, did not include the final chapter that ended
with a gruesome crucifixion?
Another example of Anunnaki interference in human entrapment, was
the birth and life of the prophet Muhammad. Many extraordinary stories
are told about the birth of the great prophet. A brilliant light shone over
the entire world from East to West in the hour of his delivery. “When
Mohammed was born he was clean and without physical blemish, already
circumcised, and with the navel cord already cut. At the age of four,
Mohammed was visited by angels. They opened his body, taking a black
drop from his heart while washing his inward parts with melted snow
from a golden chalice. Furthermore there are many elements within
Islamic folklore which imply and support a virgin birth.” (Andras, 1960).
The paranoia of losing control of their ‘slave species’ is also clearly
visible in the events leading up to the reciting of the Koran. As N.J.
Dawood states in his introduction to the Koran, that long before
Muhammad's call, the Arabic world was worshipping many gods, whom
they called the ‘daughters of Allah’. Some of those were female
goddesses like Al-Lat, Al-Uzza and Manat. This was another area where
Enlil and his Anunnaki gods had to take action before they lost any more
control, allowing the humans to organise themselves against him. The
power of the church was growing but it had not reached the kind of
horrifying muscle which it would exercise during the Crusades somecenturies later. Meanwhile, this was some 610 years after Christ, and still
the slave species did not learn the lessons from Jesus, that they should
only worship one god, and the only way into ‘heaven’ was through him.
So, the ‘god’ who had set up Jesus needed another messenger. The
famous story of the angel Gabriel appearing before Muhammad, strongly
resembles the process of setting up Mary and Joseph, pretty much to their
surprise and against their will. Muhammad would become a prophet who
is followed by people who fear the violent retribution of their god.
According to Muslim tradition, one night in Ramadan about 610 AD, the
angel Gabriel came to him while he was asleep or in a trance, and said:
“Recite!” He replied: ‘What shall I recite?’ The order was repeated three
times until the angel himself said: ‘Recite the name of your Lord who
created, created man from clots of blood.’
That statement is perfectly in synch with the Sumerian tablets
outlining the creation of Adam by the Anunnaki gods. What makes this
event even more interesting, is that the original Koran translation into
English carried the term ‘Lord of Creation’, which has since been
changed to ‘Lord of the Universe’ in latter translations. It may be a subtle
change to the normal reader, but if you view it from the understanding of
the Anunnaki's activity on Earth, it makes a huge difference. Because we
suspect that the Anunnaki created man, but they certainly did not create
the universe. The term ‘Lord of Creation’ was more appropriate, but it
was not grandiose enough for the followers of Mohammed. Once again
we are faced with a tragic confusion between god and God, the former of
which has kept humanity imprisoned on Earth in a perpetual fear of God.
The whole concept of angels has always troubled me. Honestly! Why
in heaven would the ‘all-powerful’, omnipotent GOD need a bunch of
lower spiritual forms in a physical form, to run His errands? To convey
messages, to deliver warnings and threats, and to actually do the
destruction on his behalf? Why would GOD need this kind of menial
support? Surely the all-powerful GOD can facilitate all the interactions
with humans in the blink of an eye, instead of long-winded tedious
instructions, threats and the monitoring of humans who have apparently
been behaving sinfully while conspiring against him! It simply does notwash.
There are further examples of possible Anunnaki or Nefilim
interferences in controlling humans. Many are kept under wraps for fear
of ridicule. It seems that people in the 21st century are not as brave to
come out with claims of having been visited by angels, as their brethren
of ancient times. There was one such occasion in 1820, when the young
Joseph Smith had his first encounter with what was described as an
‘angel’ who returned on several occasions to repeat ‘exactly’ the same
message of doom and destruction among humans. The way in which the
young Joseph relates his story points to a possibility that the message was
a recording which was re-played to him several times during the same
night. It was beamed into his bedroom leaving the angel ‘floating’ off the
ground. The message ended with the floating angel exiting the window in
a pillar of light until it vanished in the sky. The next day he had the same
message broadcast to him by the same angel while in the field. The
‘angel’ even introduced himself as Moroni, telling Joseph about some
ancient metal plates containing the history of North America. Joseph was
to find them and have them translated. And so was born the Mormon
Church which is many millions strong today.
I find it incredibly disturbing to contemplate the possibility that GOD
would spend virtually 13,000 years, from the emergence of civilisation,
plotting a succession of messiahs and prophets to warn people about their
sinful behaviour. Then, going on to choose one group of favourites above
another, while decimating those who had been ‘plotting and conspiring’
against him. How can people conspire against an all powerful GOD? I can
understand how people can conspire against a physical entity or even
deity, when they realize that the deities who are causing them harm are
vulnerable. But such has been the strategy of ‘divide and rule’ injected
into human society by Enlil and the hordes of ‘angels’ who seemed to
have run all his errands for thousands of years.
If there ever was a clear case of evidence of ancient people living in
fear of celestial deities, it exists in abundance in the Hindu scriptures.
The Vedas, sacred Hindu poems, which have apparently been passed onverbally for as long as 10,000 years, and eventually written down in the
Sanskrit language are filled with references to a multitude of gods who
display all the violent human traits we have described before. The most
striking characteristic once again is the ‘violent gene’. If the Vedas are
indeed as old as they seem, they are a vivid testimony of the constant
interaction between gods and humanity in the distant past while man was
being nurtured into so-called civilisation by the Anunnaki and Nefilim
gods. According to Richard Thompson in his book Alien Identities, there
are many references to ‘non-human’ interventions in ancient Indian
scriptures. I went in search of such references and was astounded at the
constant referral to things like sacrifice; fear of the gods; punishment;
reward; wealth; goddesses who loved mortal men; immortality; being
spared from harm; partying with the gods; gold; riches; victory over the
enemy; chariots in the sky; god's bright beams of light; and literally
thousands of strange references which cannot be explained in historic
terms but rather by today's common sense. Evidence of human
manipulation by heavenly deities fills hundreds of pages of the sacred
Vedic poems. Such manipulation of humans continued over the years
with the Bible, Kabala, Koran, and thousands of other documents that
have never been brought into the mainframe, such as the apocryphal
books of the Bible and writings of other religious groups. In the end, we
have to admit that the strategy used by the Anunnaki has worked very
well. Although stretched over long periods of Earth time, often appearing
to be very disorganised, the gods of our prehistory, the Anunnaki, have
achieved their goal. They have divided humanity, turned them against
each other and they have conquered them with fear.
So, now that we have a clearer picture of the suspicious events
surrounding the births and lives of some prophets of our human history,
we can attempt to answer the question of who Jesus Christ really was. To
some readers, the inbred fear of the mere suggestion that Jesus was
anything other than the son of GOD, will prevent them from crossing this
bridge. I am of the firm opinion that Jesus was just one of many prophets
or messiahs who were carefully planned by the Anunnaki gods, in an
attempt to keep humanity in line, fearful and obedient, to the great godswho ruled the world, and possibly still rule it today.
If you find this preposterous just ask yourself this question: The
world's largest organisations who control our day-to-day lives are
controlled by a small group of people who basically determine what
brands we consume, how we dress, what TV shows we watch, what we
drive, what beer we drink and where we go on holiday. How often do we
see the small group of decision makers in their boardrooms as they plan
our next mode of transport? Never. We simply accept it as it emerges and
get on with our lives. But we believe and we 'know' that there is such a
group of people making those decisions which will influence our lives
dramatically. We know that there is a group of people who control the
price of oil, but we do not know what happens in their meetings while
they plan our future. We simply live with the consequences. Our lives are
controlled by a relatively small number of major industries and a small
number of people in charge of those industries, but we simply accept that
this is the case and that in truth there is not really much we can do about
it. The absolute power which the giants of global industry wield is
virtually unassailable. We should therefore not be surprised to find out
that there could be a small number of ancient Anunnaki ‘gods’ who still
reside among us, controlling our affairs in ways which we cannot
comprehend and cannot see.
As far as Jesus is concerned, it certainly seems that he was the most
successful of the planted messiahs. He was the one who took root and
captured the hearts and imagination of the people of his time, while the
other prophets only achieved moderate success. To the gods who planned
him and placed him into the world, Jesus was a great achievement and
possibly even a great surprise for finding success where many others
before him had failed. He managed to plant seeds of obedience but also
perpetuated the fear of god, while unconsciously spreading the principle
of ‘divide and conquer’ among humanity. And so the Anunnaki gods
reaped another major victory over their human slave species, keeping
them enslaved and obedient for another 2,000 years. Who knows how
much longer this grip of fear will control our world, before we will all be
able to break free from the entrapment by our creators, our slave masters,our gods with a small ‘g’, so that we can reach out to the infinite
community of universal beings who live in unity with the real GOD. The
universal one, who needs no offerings of gold, or offerings of flesh, or
who harbours no need to punish humanity for disobedience; the GOD who
does not choose one favourite human over another.
But the most compelling argument which supports that Jesus was an
innocent bystander and accidental Messiah comes from Barbara Thiering
in her book Jesus of the Apocalypse – The life of Jesus after the
crucifixion. Most people will be shocked to find out that the story of
Jesus did not end on the cross or with his resurrection. Ms. Thiering
presents a volume of evidence, mostly originating in the book of
Revelations, that Jesus retreated into a secretive life of anti-Roman
activity with his two sons and daughter. We learn that by the time Jesus
was crucified, he was already married to Mary Magdalene. Their first
wedding took place during September in 30 AD not long after Jesus
began his ministry. We should also remember that there is now
overwhelming evidence that Jesus was actually born in the year 7 BC,
which would have made him seven years older than history books lead us
to believe. Their second wedding took place during March to May in 33
AD according to their custom, when they knew that Mary Magdalene was
more than three months pregnant and a miscarriage was less likely to
occur. But it was a turbulent time for the Messiah as this was also the
year in which he was to be executed. Later that year in September, his
wife Mary Magdalene gave birth to a daughter, their first child. Jesus
rises from the dead, his body mysteriously disappears from the tomb and
an ‘angel’ tells Mary Magdalene and friends that he had risen on the 3 rd
day as he promised he would. Those irrepressible angels seem to pop up
every time there is possible trouble for the Anunnaki gods. Jesus begins
his anti-Roman campaign with his disciples and a growing number of
revolutionaries. They struggle against Agrippa I; Caligula; Agrippa II and
other Roman leaders. In June 37 AD his first son Jesus Justus is born. In
March 44 AD his second son is born and in September of that year his
marriage to Mary ends. He travels extensively seeking support for hismovement, in Cyprus, Asia Minor, Rome, Ephesus, Philippi where he
marries a woman called Lydia in 50 AD. He continues to travel until he
dies in the year 70 AD, at the age of 76, most likely in Rome. While this
is a shocking glossary and revelation for the most religious, Ms Thiering
goes into great detail in supporting these facts. But let us go back to the
resurrection, because it was really from this point onwards that things
went a little pear-shaped in the scriptures and many questions arise as to
what possibly happened to the son of God after he rose from the dead.
Suspicious activity surrounds the cave and the reactions of those who
came in search of Jesus. It seems that the ‘angel’ did something to the
guards which incapacitated them as they “became like dead men”. The
gods used Mary to help spread the propaganda that Jesus had arisen.
Matthew 27:65 -66
“‘Take a guard,’ Pilate answered. ‘Go, make the tomb as secure as
you know how.’ So they went and made the tomb secure by putting a
seal on the stone and posting the guard.”
Matthew 28:1 -10. The Resurrection
“After the Sabbath, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary
Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb. There was a
violent earthquake, for an angel of the Lord came down from heaven
and, going to the tomb, rolled back the stone and sat on it. His
appearance was like lightning, and his clothes were white as snow.
The guards were so afraid of him that they shook and became like
dead men. The angel said to the women, ‘Do not be afraid, for I
know that you are looking for Jesus, who was crucified. He is not
here; he has risen, just as he said. Come and see the place where he
lay. Then go quickly and tell his disciples: He has risen from the
dead and is going ahead of you into Galilee. There you will see him.
Now I have told you.’ So the women hurried away from the tomb,
afraid yet filled with joy, and ran to tell his disciples. Suddenly Jesus
met them. ‘Greetings,’ he said. They came to him, clasped his feet
and worshipped him. Then Jesus said to them, ‘Do not be afraid. Go
and tell my brothers to go to Galilee; there they will see me.’”And so began the life of ‘Jesus the revolutionary’ after his resurrection.
There was so much activity between Jesus and Simon, Mark, John, Peter,
Matthew and others that it baffles the mind and I highly recommend the
reading of Jesus of the Apocalypse for the sceptics. What could have
possibly happened to Jesus after these events? How could the son of
GOD; the messiah of the people, just suddenly disappear from the face of
the world? If he survived and lived on, would he not have continued a life
of ministry of some sort? Why did he go into hiding? The biggest
surprise comes when we learn of Jesus' personal views of the events
surrounding his life. He was so disillusioned by all the activity that after
his resurrection he vanished from the scene and carried on living with
wife and children until the age of about 76, leading the life of an activist
against the Romans. But why the Romans? Jesus was not a stupid man, he
was extremely well-travelled, well-educated and broad-minded. He must
have realised that he was set up by the gods to be their front and
mouthpiece. The gods who presented themselves as the GOD of the
universe, the God with a big ‘G’. It must have come as a great shock to
him that this was not the case and that he was greatly manipulated, lied to
and misguided by the deities of Rome. It became clear to him that these
were actually the gods of Rome; the conniving and manipulative gods
who have been controlling humanity from the very beginning. This made
Jesus retreat and with his fellow supporters begin a campaign of
underground resistance against those Roman gods. They realised that the
‘gods’ were not infallible and that humans could stand up against them.
Just like his predecessors during the time of Abraham did, in the cities of
Sodom and Gomorrah, the earliest organised resistance against the gods,
for which they were severely punished. I cannot find another plausible
explanation why the son of GOD, who survived his execution would
suddenly disappear from the mainstream when he had had such a loyal
following. In the years after his death the Christian movement grew
steadily, but in truth it was a movement which was aimed at discrediting
the Anunnaki gods of Rome, while offering the people a whole new
spiritual reality which Jesus absorbed during his early years in Asia. It is
ironic that the Messiah who was planted and manipulated by the lesserdeity gods to keep Humankind enslaved through fear, turned against his
makers and began to preach the awareness of a greater spiritual power in
the universe. But history got it all mixed up, and the poor faithful masses
today do not really know who they are praying to. Because the message of
Christ after his death is not clearly recorded or understood, but it
somehow seeped into the greater pool of religious preaching and
continues to be highly confusing in the 21st century. The number of
divergent Christian movements are testimony to this curious
development in the Christian Church.
The desperation of the Anunnaki gods becomes evident when they try
to create new prophets and messiahs, like in the story of Mohammed who
was throttled by an ‘angel’ commanding Mohammed to recite the name
of the Lord. As time went by and humans emerged out of the Dark Ages
and the Renaissance, the activity of the gods seemed to have diminished.
They had greatly achieved what they had set out to do. To keep their
human slave species ignorant, divided, faithful and frightened of the
wrath of god. So here we are, some 200,000 years after our creation,
having gone through many stages of development, civilisation,
mechanisation and now technology. And still we do not know who we are
and where we come from. 70% of the world population holds onto some
fanatical religious belief system which promises to give them salvation
over the masses of sinners in the world. Regardless of the technological
achievements and our exploration of the planets, many still hold onto
their ancient belief system, too scared to challenge it with newfound
knowledge. Jesus was just an innocent bystander who was chosen and
manipulated by the conniving Anunnaki gods. But when he realised what
had actually happened to him, he tried his best to undo the damage.
Unfortunately it was a little too late. The Roman Empire used his
example to perpetuate the lie under Constantine who was most likely
guided by Enlil and his godly followers, while the Aryans and the
supporters of Marduk opposed their activity, which is clearly outlined
during the council of Nicaea of 325 AD.
If you think that the mystery surrounding Jesus is pretty muchexhausted, think again. We have only scratched the surface. A real mind
bender occurred in 1963 with the discovery of the Talmud of Jmmanuel
(TJ) scrolls. Eduard Albert Meier, a Swiss traveller and his friend, an ex-
Greek-Orthodox priest, Isa Rashid, were walking along a roadway just
south of the Old City of Jerusalem, when Meier happened to glance up
and noticed a small opening in the ground amongst the rocks and shrubs.
Curiosity made him reach into his backpack for his flashlight and he
peered into the hole to notice that it continued inwards. They proceeded
to dig away rocks and earth until the hole was large enough that they
could crawl inside. It was an old tomb site, half filled in with soil. After
further digging and exploring they noticed a bundle buried underneath a
flat rock. It turned out to be the TJ in the form of rolls of written sheets,
along with a few small artefacts. They were wrapped up together in
animal skin which was in turn encased in resin. There were four rolls,
each of which contained many leaves or pages of Aramaic writing. They
were old and fragile and each leaf was roughly 30cm by 40cm in size.
Rashid, who could read most of the old Aramaic due to his priestly
education and Palestinian background, was concerned that the scripts
were heretical. For example, its title involved Jmmanuel (i.e. Immanuel,
spelled with a J-symbol; making use of the ‘i’ sound in place of the
Aramaic/Hebrew letter ‘Ayin’) rather than Jesus or Y'shua. Furthermore,
its writer was noted as Judas Iscariot, the supposed betrayer of Christ.
Thirdly, it mentioned that Adam's father had been Semjasa, the leader of
the “celestial sons”, who were El's or God's guardian angels, and who
were “distant travellers”. It immediately became apparent that if they
ever wished this document to become public, its translation would have
to proceed in secret. The scrolls further indicated that the Old Testament
god had been an extraterrestrial leader, taking on the role of a ‘Father’ in
heaven, rather than the omnipotent GOD. So let us refer to him as El, as
in Immanu-el.
Rashid spent a few months reading through the TJ rolls to extract the
highlights, which he reported to Meier. In August of 1963 they agreed
that Rashid would translate the TJ into German and would retain custody
of the Aramaic document, while sending his translations to Meier for himto disseminate. So Rashid started the long task of rendering a translation
while Meier continued his travels.
The first set of translations up to chapter 36 of the TJ reached Meier in
Switzerland some time around 1970, but Meier did not hear from Rashid
himself until in a letter in September of 1974. This letter briefly
explained the disturbing news that his translation project had become
known to certain authorities, forcing him to flee from Jerusalem, together
with his family. Rashid found his way with the TJ rolls and further
translations, to a refugee camp in Lebanon. But his presence there
became known to Israeli authorities forcing him to flee again, this time to
Baghdad, where he posted the letter to Meier. He and his family, like the
other refugees, had to flee so suddenly that Rashid had no time to retrieve
the original Aramaic rolls or his further translations of them, and they
were destroyed in the chaos from which they fled. In 1976 Meier learned
that Rashid and his family were assassinated in Baghdad. Fortunately the
German translations were quite substantial and various versions have
been released from the original version of 1978. The latest edition was
due out in 2005.
Meier insists that publications of non-German translations of the TJ
include the side-by-side German edition, so that discrepancies or
distortions in translation be less likely to creep in. The translation of the
original Aramaic pages of the first roll, reads as if it is the original
writing of the ministry and teachings of Jesus. However, the messiah is
referred to as Immanuel and not Jesus. The TJ resembles very closely the
Gospel of Matthew in both wording, where the verses have close
parallels, and in its order, although each contains many passages not
contained by the other. James W. Deardorf is an esteemed author of a
number of detailed books dealing with Jesus in India and other New
Testament issues. He states that “Even a brief comparison of the TJ
against the Gospel of Matthew discloses that one depends upon the other.
The correspondence in order of events and sometimes in wording is too
close to permit any other possibility”. Deardorf has been analyzing the TJ
since 1986 and has found several hundred reasons why the verses in
Matthew were derived from the Talmud, and that it is virtuallyimpossible for these writings to be the work of hoaxers. The Talmud
speaks of a supreme deity called El who orchestrated all the activity
surrounding humanity on Earth. Could this be the Enlil we read about in
Sumerian texts, who was the supreme Anunnaki commander of planet
Earth? Here are some excerpts from the Talmud to illustrate its close but
shocking relationship to the Gospel of Matthew.
TJ 1:1
“This is the book and Arcanum of Jmmanuel, who is called ‘the one
with godly knowledge,’ who is a son of Joseph, grandson of Jacob,
the distant descendant of David. David was a descendant of Abram
[Abraham], whose genealogy traces back to Adam, the father of a
lineage of terrestrial humans. Adam was begotten by Semjasa, the
leader of the celestial sons who were the guardian angels of El, the
great ruler of the travellers from afar.”
I would dare to say that this follows closely my postulated theory that
Humankind is a slave species created by ancient settlers on Earth, who
seemed to be highly advanced and regarded as ‘gods’ by us, up until
recent times.
TJ 1:80 -81
“Jacob begot Joseph. Joseph was the husband of Mary, the mother of
Jmmanuel, who was impregnated by a distant descendant of the
celestial son, Rasiel, who was the guardian angel of the secret.”
Rasiel was the guardian angel who appears to have been associated with a
master plan to ensure that a highly evolved human like Jmmanuel was
incarnated at the right time and right place. Rasiel is also mentioned in
the Kabbalah and the book of Zohar as the angel who was the master of
mysteries.
TJ: 1:82
“When Joseph heard of Mary's secret impregnation by a descendant
of the celestial sons from the lineage of Rasiel, behold, he was filled
with wrath and thought of leaving Mary before he would be married
to her before the people.”TJ 1:83 -84
“While Joseph was thinking in this manner, behold, a guardian
angel, sent by Gabriel, the celestial son who had impregnated Mary,
appeared and said: ‘Joseph, Mary is betrothed to you and you are to
become her spouse; do not leave her, because the fruit of her womb
is chosen for a great purpose. Marry her in all openness, so that you
may be husband and wife before the people.’”
TJ 1:85
“Behold, the impregnation of Mary occurred eleven thousand years
after the procreation of Adam through the celestial son Semjasa, to
fulfil the word of El, the ruler of those who travelled from afar, who
conveyed these words through the prophet Isaiah:”
Here is a comparison between Matthew and Talmud Jmmanuel. See the
last part which refers to ‘one with godly knowledge’.
Mt 1:23
“Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and his name shall
be called Emmanuel (which means, God with us).”
TJ 1:86 -87
“Behold, a virgin will be impregnated by a celestial son before she is
married to a man before the people. They will name the fruit of her
womb Jmmanuel, which translated means ‘the one with godly
knowledge’...”
In the following verses the writer of Matthew omitted to mention the
name of the prophet Micah, while the Talmud makes it clear who the
actual prophet was, that gave them the information.
Mt 2:4 -6
“… and assembling all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he
[Herod] inquired of them where the Christ was to be born. They told
him, ‘In Bethlehem of Judea; for so it is written by the prophet: And
you, O Bethlehem, in the land of Judah, are by no means least among
the rulers of Judah; for from you shall come a ruler who will governmy people Israel.’”
TJ 2:9 -11
“Herod Antipas called together all the chief priests and scribes from
among the people and inquired of them where Jmmanuel had been
born. And they replied: ‘In Bethlehem, in the Jewish land; for thus it
was written by the prophet Micah: And you, Bethlehem, in the land
of the Jews, are by no means the least among the cities in Judea, for
from you shall come forth the king of wisdom, who will bring great
knowledge to the people of Israel so that they may learn and serve
Creation.’”
The description of a sound emanating from the star which hovered ahead
of The Three Wise Men is a clear indication that there was some sinister
activity surrounding this event, which can be explained with the help of
advanced technology and machinery. Once again, the Matthew version
does not include this particular section.
TJ 2:14
“After they [the magi] had listened to Herod Antipas, they departed.
And behold, the light with the long tail, which they had observed in
the Orient, moved ahead of them with a high singing sound until it
reached Bethlehem and stood directly over the stable where the
infant was born.”
TJ 3:2 -4
“John the Baptist preached of baptism in accordance with the old
laws of El, according to which the way to knowledge was to be
prepared. He preached that El's laws shall be followed because he is
the sole ruler of this human lineage. He preached that above El,
however, stands Creation, the source of the worlds, universes and all
living creatures.”
In the next comparison we have more evidence of some sort of
intervention from a higher technological intelligence. Matthew is
however less open about the true events. Were these the kind of events
which were edited out of the New Testament by the Church councils?Mt 3:16 -17
“And when Jesus was baptised, he went up immediately from the
water, and behold, the heavens were opened and he saw the Spirit of
God descending like a dove, and a lighting on him; and lo, a voice
from heaven, saying, ‘This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well
pleased.’”
TJ 3:30 -32
“When Jmmanuel had been baptized, he soon came out of the water
of the Jordan, and behold, a metallic light came down from the sky
and rushed over the Jordan. Consequently they all fell on their faces
and pressed them into the sand while a voice from the metallic light
spoke, ‘This is my beloved son with whom I am well pleased. He
will be the king of truth, through which terrestrial humans shall rise
as wise ones.’”
And so the comparisons continue for dozens and dozens of verses. The
obvious difference is that the Talmud refers to the constant intervention
of angels and other celestial beings, while the Gospel has a cleaner, more
acceptable version of the events to suit the monotheistic community
which was being nurtured by the early Church. Is it possible that whoever
wrote the Talmud did so in an attempt to cut through the stranglehold and
disinformation which was being imposed by the ‘gods of Enlil’ on
humanity? Someone who was well aware of the activity of the ancient
gods who ruled the world? After all, these were the times of Roman
mythology and everyone was very aware of the many gods and angels
who ruled the roost.
While numerous scholars have found the book of Matthew to be full of
inconsistencies, ambiguities and interruptions in flow of thought, such
inconsistencies are not nearly as obvious in the Talmud. A growing
number of scholars agree that Jmmanuel's teachings had to be altered or
omitted to conform with the views of early Christianity. What this
discovery does achieve is to confirm that Jesus or Jmmanuel did travel to
India and back during the ‘lost’ years of his life.
The gods who were orchestrating Jesus' life had much bigger plans forhim. They wanted to make sure that this newly established prophet of
theirs was recognised all over the populated world. In her book He
Walked the Americas L. Taylor Hansen reveals many breathtaking
examples of how Jesus spread the gospel among the native north
American tribes and the rest of the Americas, always symbolized by a T-
cross. There is endless mention of a “White Prophet” with a beard, or
“Healer”, and many references of him arriving to teach them wisdom.
These legends are still told by the fireside of a “saintly white teacher”
who performed miracles with healing. They describe his eyes as grey-
green like the ocean and his symbol has been woven into blankets, carved
on canyon walls, put on pottery and is even depicted in dances. His name
has been given to mountains and rivers; and just as I suggest in this book
that the Anunnaki gods taught humanity about civilisation, agriculture,
planting and harvesting, so do the native American tales speak of the Pale
Prophet who came to teach them all these things. He gave them seeds to
plant and taught them wisdom. And guess what his symbol was? A
winged serpent. Is it possible that the winged serpent, whom we believe
to be Ningishzidda or Enki, brought Jesus to the Americas on the
instructions of Enlil?
He was called the ‘Feathered Serpent’ or ‘Eeseecotl’ among the
Algonquins. They say that he always wore a long white toga and golden
sandals. Every new town he arrived in would have a new garment waiting
for him. They would keep the old ones, saying that to touch them would
bring healing. During his stay he would train twelve disciples, with one
appointed to be their leader, who would take his place when he left. He
would say he had to “go about My Father's Business”. This is a clear sign
of extreme manipulation of Humankind by the Anunnaki gods. Enlil was
going to do everything in his power to squeeze Marduk out, denying him
the pleasure of controlling the world. To do this, their manufactured
messiah Jesus, would have to be accepted by as many ‘slave species’ as
possible. And so they would ensure that this was going to happen even as
far away as in the Americas. The Shawnee tribe speak of a message that
was given to them by the Prophet. “Do not kill or injure your neighbour,
for it is not he that you injure; you injure yourself. Do good to him, thusadding to his days of happiness even as you then add to your own. Do not
wrong or hate your neighbour; for it is not he that you wrong: you wrong
yourself. Rather love him, for the Great Spirit loves him, even as He
loves you.” This was the kind of message that humans were yearning for,
for thousands of years under the oppressive regime of the Anunnaki gods.
Enlil was providing them with a way out.
Michigan was the centre of the Giant Cross of Waters and the Prophet
was known to travel this trail. No tribe was too far, too small, too poor or
too violent. He would enter war situations, he would call all the chiefs
together and divide the lands. He gave them seeds which they did not
know about and showed them how to farm. He would teach them ‘His’
principles and go to any length to ensure they remembered him above all
possible future prophets. These tales are mirrored from tribe to tribe. But
Jesus did not only raise people from the dead, in the Americas he revived
even animals.
L. Taylor Hanson tells us how the Healer knelt down beside a dead dear
whose faun was standing nearby and started stroking the body. As his
hand passed over the wounds, they healed up, leaving no marks. And soon
the deer started breathing and rose. His disciples were upset saying that
he was wasting his energy on animals. The Pale One said, “There cannot
be too many good deeds. Such is the manner of compassion. A lost lamb
is my Father's business, as important as saving a nation, if one need not
choose between them. More precious in my Father's eyes is a good deed
than the most exquisite jewel.” We can clearly see how seriously Jesus
took his mission here on Earth, before he realised that he was being set up
by the Anunnaki gods. He told the people he was born across the ocean
where all men had beards. Even in the American legends, he told them of
his virgin birth and about the bright star that shone over the place of his
birth. “The heavens opened up and winged beings sang chants of
exquisite beauty.”
During a dig by the University of Oklahoma at the Spiro Mound, they
unearthed pottery showing winged beings singing and also a hand with
the cross through the palm. The locals refer to him as ‘Chee-Zoos’, the
Dawn God. “The love they bear Him is beyond measurement, for wellthey know He watches over them, and that when their journey here is
over, He will meet them in the Land of Shadows, for such was His sacred
promise.” Once again we hear about the promise of a life after death
which was commonly promoted by the gods among humans, to keep them
faithful and loyal.
There are further tales of the ‘Great Mound Builders’ by Decoodah, the
last high priest of extinct Elks, which was translated and recorded by
Walter Pidgeon around 1850. The legends described them as tribes that
spoke the Algonquin language and they were the ‘Ancients’ of the
country. These legendary mounds marked the sites of ancient cities and
are closely related to the mounds of the Mayans of Mexico, drawing a
distinct connection with the 'winged serpent' which is referred to by both
cultures. They also possessed a unique ancient type of writing that
recorded history. The mounds were apparently covered by wood and
painted as the Mayans had done. The 'Great White Robed Master' with his
grey-green eyes and golden sandals also stayed among the mound
builders. Stone pictographs of the prophet have been found causing much
debate about his close resemblance to Jesus.
The Pawnee tribe talk of a prophet who visited them twice and taught
them about ‘His Father’, “The Mighty Holy of the Heavens”.
The wrath of god was well experienced by the native American tribes
as well as those who lived in biblical lands. The Pawnee tribe angered
god by being violent so he appeared from the sky to intervene and cast his
judgment on them. This extract sounds just like many passages from the
Bible. “The eastern sky lit up with fire, growing ever brighter; everyone
turned toward the brightened sky and stopped in their tracks…and
suddenly there 'He' was among them!” He asked them if this was how
they kept His commandments, insulting the Father. “I came to shield you
from His anger, or lo, great wind would ignite the forest! And to ashes
would be consigned the Pawnee Nation!” We know from the events at
Sodom, that these were not idle threats. God certainly had it in him to
decimate a people out of anger. Humans were taught it was the ‘wrath of
god’.The “Algonquin of the Eastern Seaboard” say that they received their
name for the Dawn Light from the Pale One. The Algonquin remember
him well and the time of his arrival. The fleets coming down the river
delivered him ceremoniously and he was always greeted with flowers.
The Chippewa also remember him very well “the pale Great Master”. He
gave them medicine lodges with sacred symbols which were the signs and
emblems from across the ocean. The Sioux tribe, say that he gave them
their rite of baptism and purification. The following excerpt is virtually
identical to the way Jesus behaved in Palestine:
“First to climb the mound was the Prophet. As over the horizon
arose the first golden shafts of the Dawn Star, the Pale God spoke to
the assembled nations. It is said that He always charmed His
listeners, but now there was almost a breathless silence. Indeed it
seemed the very trees were listening and also the assembled animals
of the forest, so softly He spoke and so well did they hear Him,
because of the silence that had settled.”
The legends about the Pale Prophet go on and on among the North
American natives, but they continue further south into the land of the
Toltecs. He went to the Empire of Tula, the capital of the peaceful
Toltecs. He also went to the Wallapai tribe where he gathered the chiefs
in a great counsel and redistributed their grain fields. He taught them
advanced farming techniques with melons, squashes, pumpkins, mescal,
and beans; he gave them many other plants which have been lost through
the ages. This is an excerpt which was spoken by Marksman, an old
Chippewa warrior at a council of native American tribes.
“‘It is well tonight that we speak of the Pale God, and fitting as well
that we council with others, greeting our enemies as brothers, for
such would have been the wish of the Prophet.’
The last to speak at the council was a man from the Cheyenne and this is
what he said: “Like our brothers we remember the Fair God who foretold
the coming of the White Man. Yet so long ago was He living that like the
Dacotah, our memories are garbled.”Is it possible that Jesus travelled the world with his message? Is it
possible that he was aided in doing so by the ‘Winged Feathered Serpent’
who appears in most global mythologies? The evidence is there for all to
see. After all, even Jesus himself spoke of his ‘sheep’ in distant lands.
John 10:16
“I have other sheep that are not of this sheep pen. I must bring them
also. They too will listen to my voice, and there shall be one flock
and one shepherd.”