CHAPTER 16
Story of Humankind
Historians and archaeologists play a pivotal role in the way we
perceive our world. They present us with a host of facts that shape our
current belief structures, the way we imagine the World Wars, the Roman
emperors, or the landing on the moon; historians become the custodians
and the story tellers of what happened in the past. They wallow in the
events surrounding the building of the pyramids and even describe the
way the dinosaurs looked and behaved. In essence, anything that
happened before our own time of reference is described to us by experts
who study those past events. Their versions of those ancient and
prehistoric images flood our minds and in most cases, they are chiselled
into our sub-conscience as a direct consequence of how the past has been
presented to us by the experts. If they get it wrong, we all get it wrong,
and we never really know about it or question it. We expect the experts to
tell us the whole truth and nothing but the truth. It is unfortunate that very
few people are ever told about the amount of speculation that goes on in
these revered professions. All you have to do is take a history book from
50 years ago and compare it to the way in which those historic events are
presented in our present time. You will be fascinated to see how much
they differ. The point is that history, as much as archaeology, is a living
science and as we discover more, our objective views of specific events
change according to the importance of our discoveries. Scientists and
leaders are equally guilty of shaping people’s ideas of things around
them. In most cases scientific discoveries are based on interim results
based on hypotheses, theories, speculation and faith in the eventual
outcome, as much as theologians carry their blind faith towards their god.
In the Dark Ages people really believed that the world was flat. They
feared for the lives of the brave explorers as they set off into the greatunknown, across the ocean, surely to be devoured by the monsters which
dwelled at the bottom of the edge of the world. There are publications
from our human past which speak of such things and yet today it would
be laughable to reintroduce such theories. One hundred years ago, people
were told by leading scientists that man would never be able to fly. In
1903, when the Wright brothers were flying their first plane at Kitty
Hawk, the leading physicist of the time refused to attend a demonstration
as he proclaimed that “Man will never fly a heavier than air machine”.
Such utterances had a great impact on the point of view of many ordinary
people who took their lead from the so-called experts of their times. In
this instance it prompted the news editor of the local paper to write an
article which outlined the scientific facts as presented by the eminent
authority, which instantly turned the adventurers' attempts into a
questionable pastime. It must have affected the Wright brothers'
development and possibly retarded their progress for all that we know.
Even today, in times when anything should be deemed possible, some
scientists are still guilty of killing new ideas based on their personal
perspectives. Historians have been known to hide facts or new
discoveries, and so have archaeologists, for all kinds of personal reasons.
Governments have kept secrets from their people for as long as
Humankind has been on Earth, citing all kinds of silly reasons, of which
the issue of national security is used as a common excuse. Churches and
other religious organisations have kept secrets from their followers for
reasons only they seem to be able to justify. Even sports teams and their
managers keep secrets from their fans in today's highly competitive
sports industries. There is much to be said for the existence of a myriad
of secret societies and yet with all their supposed power and influence,
the world is perched on the verge of self-destruction. When we look at
some of the great achievements of the past few thousand years, since we
emerged as a civilised species from the caves and embarked on a path of
rapid evolution, we constantly stumble over the Dark Ages when all
human knowledge seems to have disappeared. We slowly re-emerged
from those times like a new species, rediscovering knowledge, but
somehow this knowledge has been around with our ancestors forthousands of years. But once again, historians and archaeologists fall prey
to their own insecurity. If they don't understand something, or if it does
not fit into their frame of reference, it seems to get classified as fiction,
esoteric, New-Age or mythological. These kind of actions have done
Humankind a great deal of damage when it comes to solving the
problems of our origins. There are extremely smart people who have
devoted large parts of their lives to unravelling the murky waters of our
ancient past, but their credibility is continuously eroded by short-sighted
‘experts’ with a different personal agenda. These agendas can be so
incredibly subtle that we don't even realise we are being manipulated into
believing something which is not really so.
I have two personal favourites which have tickled my fancy for many
years. UFOs and the Pyramids. I have never seen a UFO or been
abducted, or ‘astral-travelled’ or had weird extrasensory interactions with
‘aliens’, but I try to keep a rational perspective on the whole matter. Let's
put all the sightings and so-called abductions into one giant pot for one
minute and imagine that all of them are wrong. They all saw something
else, they all experienced something impossible, or they all just had a
really vivid dream; all the hordes of people who have made these claims
over centuries were all wrong… all except one. The one UFO which was
not imaginary, but was real, puts a whole new perspective on the matter
and suddenly makes it all very real. In the field of statistics, it is virtually
impossible for every single person to have been wrong or have simply
imagined things. The statistical probability of such a coincidence is many
millions to ‘one’. Even then, there is still the ‘one’. And that ‘one’can
change our world dramatically if we just embrace this new reality and
learn more about it. A close friend of mine made an interesting remark
saying that having an open mind is like being pregnant. Either you are, or
you are not.
My other favourite is the story of the Pyramids. I remember how
impressed I was as a child when I saw the detailed pictures of slaves
dragging giant monoliths, one by one, to build the three greatest
structures in the world, even by today's standards. The descriptions of
exactly how they went about getting the rock, shaping it, building theramps, putting them on sleighs and dragging them into position. All those
slaves or families who made a living out of building pyramids were
responsible for dragging 1,6 million giant rocks, up steep ramps, each
weighing between 1,5 and 3,5 metric tons, carefully creating the passages
and inner chambers, all fitting so tightly that you cannot squeeze a blade
of grass between them. To top it all, they covered these incredible
structures with perfectly smoothed white limestone averaging 15 tons
each, which had even greater levels of accuracy in the joints. This would
have taken thousands of workers at least 50 years to complete if they
managed to fit 100 stones per day. And all of this, so that one Pharaoh
could be buried in it? This impressed me immensely when I was ten years
old, but when I started to read a bit more about these mystical structures,
I realised there was much more to them than meets the eye, and that we
were not so sure about who actually built the Great Pyramid, but we think
it was King Khufu. From that day on I decided never to believe anything
written by historians again, but rather inform myself about the situation
and formulate my own informed opinion. I would much rather have our
children at school be taught that we do not know who built the pyramids,
allowing their minds to absorb the reality and formulate their own
theories as they grow and search for clues on their own. We have to stop
making absolute statements about the past which are built on fragments
of speculative knowledge by ‘experts’ with personal issues. The damage
that has been caused over millennia will take much undoing, to allow
humans to free their minds and allow themselves to think for themselves
with the real knowledge that has been kept from them by authorities and
especially the religious leaders, most of whom have been brainwashed to
a large extent by their own lack of knowledge. Or could it be that they
have knowledge which they do not want to share with us? The religious
and political fear in which most humans live is immense and will take
centuries to reverse. But we have to start somewhere. The many writers
who have challenged the conventional popular belief systems are growing
in numbers and their readers are discovering new horizons of human
knowledge in greater numbers every day. As in all of history, only time
will help shine the light on the real facts surrounding our human origins.I embark on this somewhat ‘righteous’ bashing of the sciences for
reasons of my own personal agenda. I developed an urge to share the
information which I have absorbed over a 20-year period, with those in
search of something light and juicy to read. Not too scientific but meaty
enough to stir the pot. I hope it will motivate others to do their own
scratching and discover new evidence that has been buried beneath
millennia of disinformation. It seems that now is the time when more and
more people are looking for new answers to the mystery of our origins.
They are not satisfied with the diluted answers and the reasons and the
religious rhetoric they've been fed. They want to know what else is out
there of which they have been deprived. So when we talk about events
which truly challenge our personal beliefs, and when we propose new
theories which shake the foundation of popular establishments, we must
rise above those insecurities and remind ourselves that things are not
always what they seem. The popular example of two people looking at an
object from two opposite sides comes to mind. What the one sees, is
totally different to what the other one sees. I need you to keep this in
mind as we embark on the last stretch of the road to discovering our
human origins.
This chapter will take us on an epic journey of new discovery so
fantastic that our natural instinct would be to block it out. Since the 1970s
when more scholars became attracted to the Sumerian translations of clay
tablets polluting the basements of many museums of the world, a whole
new wave of information started to emerge. Suddenly we were exposed to
a whole new civilisation that preceded all others, which spoke a different
language and made references to times before their own from where all
their knowledge was derived. Once again, many conservative scholars
have shown great restraint and the majority of books written about those
new finds have placed them safely under mythology or fiction. There has
however been a growing number of authors who have identified that there
is much more to those stories from the ancient past than meets the eye.
Erich von Daniken truly popularised the whole concept of ‘extra-
terrestrial activity’ on Earth in prehistoric times already in the 1960s with
his Chariots of the Gods allowing mankind to really start thinking aboutthe many unexplained phenomena of our past. He was followed by many
other esteemed investigative writers, scholars and authors who took his
lead to greater heights. But it was Zecharia Sitchin who truly pushed the
newly deciphered Sumerian cuneiform text to the greatest heights in his
nine books dealing mainly with the content of the Sumerian tablets and
the eroded truth behind them. He has become one of the leading
translators of the Sumerian language and he has presented evidence so
vivid and compelling, that it is truly hard to contest. Much of this last
chapter and the story of humanity from the beginning of our time on
Earth until about 2000 BC, comes from the many translated Sumerian
tablets and some other tablets which have emerged since the '70s. It
comes from linking the stories of scattered ancient cultures to each other
and recognising the common denominators that all lead to one simple
conclusion. A conclusion which is exposed to us over and over again, in
thousands of translated clay tablets, stone carvings, seals, stelae, and
other scriptures from many cultures, clearly shining a light on who we
really are, where we come from, and why we are here. This is after all,
the one question which has crossed most humans' minds. These scriptures
all have one thing in common, and that is their references to the Sumerian
gods who came from distant lands and gave the early humans all their
knowledge. The story has been captured dramatically in The lost Book of
Enki by Zecharia Sitchin, which is a compilation of cuneiform
translations of Sumerian tablets over a period of some 30 years. On many
occasions, tablets found in different parts of Mesopotamia refer to the
same events giving us plenty of proof of their validity. It is now time to
realise that we have gone way beyond speculation. We have accumulated
a critical mass of evidence to start silencing the venomous critics and
narrow-minded disciples of mediocrity.
The time has come to accept at face value that we are not the pinnacle
of civilisation, that we are only now emerging from the cradle of
knowledge, and that we need to face the facts of our genetically created
origins. The most incredible part of it all is that GOD had nothing to with
it, but the many gods of our distant past were the true masterminds and
manipulators of our misery here on Earth. We must also come to termswith the fact that there are no ‘aliens’ involved in this great new truth we
must face. WE ARE THE ALIENS. We were created as a ‘primitive
worker’ by astronauts from another planet and in their image, some
450,000 years ago, to perform a necessary task on their new planet. We
have much of their DNA in our bodies and we look pretty much the way
they looked because they used their own DNA to create us. Part of the
terrible truth that we have to come to terms with, is that humans are
really an ‘accidental by-product’ of an ancient colonisation of Earth by
the Anunnaki from Nibiru. Humans came into existence for one reason
only, to be the slave labourers in gold mines and nothing more. The
importance attached to our existence is one which we have created in our
own minds over millennia of ignorance and evolution which were
primarily guided by the oppressive control of our creators. From the early
beginnings humans saw their makers as ‘gods’ for obvious reasons, and
not merely as more advanced beings. But as the dramatic events unfolded
on this newly settled planet, humans were slowly given more tasks to
perform, edging their way into a permanent master-slave relationship
with their maker. But the Anunnaki had their own problems to deal with
on their new planet and they did not really spend too much time worrying
about the well-being of the new ‘primitive worker’. Our primary task was
to work the gold mines and relieve the gods of all the hard labour. These
first settlers on Earth had a crucial task to perform for their leaders on
their own planet, just like our astronauts had on the many moon landings
and trips to the International Space Station, Alpha. They had their own
problems and differences and ‘we humans’ were not really a priority to
them. Humans were however an important tool to help get the gold from
the ground, but we certainly did not occupy much of the Anunnaki's
pastime. All of this will be revealed in great detail using translations
from ancient tablets.
In the chapters leading up to this point, we have looked at our DNA and
its shortcomings, its absolute control over our physical and mental
capabilities; we studied the human cell and questioned the fact that such a
perfect organism eventually dies while it should realistically exist
forever; we have explored the issue of slavery and our obsession withgold from the earliest times of Humankind; we've travelled back in time
to compare the evolutionary paths of some remotely related species to us;
and we have even reintroduced the term ‘panspermia’ into the vocabulary
of readers, outlining the facts that life exists everywhere in the universe.
Now that we have set the scene and hopefully provided enough food for
thought to start questioning the anomalies of our existence, let us begin at
the beginning. From the very first time when the first group of astronauts
from another planet arrived on Earth and discovered that there was
gold… the lifesaving metal which they were looking for in the solar
system.
Coming to Earth from Nibiru
The Sumerian tablets refer to it as the “Olden Times” when the Anunnaki
first came to Earth; and the “Prior Times” when they were on Nibiru.
Sitchin translates:
“ In the Olden Times the gods came to Earth and created the
Earthlings. In the Prior Times, none of the gods was on the Earth,
nor were the Earthlings yet fashioned. In the Prior Times, the abode
of the gods was on their own planet;
Nibiru is its name.”
The tablets refer to the elliptical orbit of Nibiru as being ‘1 Shar’, which
equals 3 600 Earth years, it is also one of the reasons we have 360
degrees in our circles. Nibiru comes in close to the sun, crossing the paths
of most planets up to Mars and the asteroid belt and then it shoots out
into deep space just like many of the long-term comets which we get to
see every few thousand years. So we should not be surprised that
astronomers could not find it in the solar system because at its apogee
(furthest point) it is possibly 3-5 times as far as Pluto is from the sun.
Nibiru's citizens were advanced in may ways and yet they seem to be on a
different level from our current state of development. I would venture to
say that our human rights legislation has surpassed their approach to the
subject all those thousands of years ago. Nibiru was under the rule of a
king and we will see how it was all imposed on us, the new ‘earthling’
species, in future years. But they had cracked the genetic code and had aclear understanding of how DNA could be manipulated. Their constant
reference to immortality makes it obvious that they had also conquered
the genetic defect which causes ‘cell death’ and humans to die. Their
planet was not free of conflict and those characteristics arrived with them
on the new planet called Earth. There are many references about the
various periods of their stay and that is why we can calculate when the
Anunnaki actually arrived on Earth. In The Lost Book of Enki it clearly
states that the flood came in the “120th Shar”.
“In the one hundred and twentieth Shar was the Deluge awaited. In
the tenth Shar in the life age of Ziusudra was the Deluge
forthcoming.”
That would place the flood 432,000 years after their arrival. Scholars
generally agree that the Great Flood occurred around 11,000 BC, which
would place the arrival of the Anunnaki on Earth some 443,000 years ago.
It is important to keep track of the time references because they play a
crucial role in supporting many of the activities and developments of
human origins and the creation of the first humans, Adam and Eve some
200,000 years ago. There was however a very good reason why the
ancient astronauts arrived here, it was not just some random decision of a
bunch of distant astronauts. After what is described as a fierce battle on
Nibiru between an appointed king and a successor by birth, a truce was
called.
“The nation of the north against the nation of the south took up
arms…A war long and fierce engulfed the planet…there was death
and destruction both north and south…for many circuits desolation
reigned the land; all life was diminished.”
A time of unification, rebuilding and peace followed, where great cities
and developments engulfed the planet of Nibiru. There is a vivid
description of Nibiru's atmosphere, explaining how the volcanoes
constantly feed the thick atmosphere which protects them against the sun
when at its closest point “…hot period it shields Nibiru from the Sun's
scorching rays...” and “...in the cold period the inner heat of Nibiru itkeeps about the planet like a warm coat...” We must remember that the
planet moves away far from the sun for longer periods than when it is
closer to the sun, it therefore needs a much denser protective layer to
sustain a temperate climate for life. Not much different from our own
atmosphere but seemingly much thicker and more active. The planet is
described as a “radiant” planet with a “reddish hue”. “A red planet,
reddish in radiance; around the sun an elongated circuit Nibiru makes.”
While some planets absorb heat and energy, others radiate heat. Nibiru is
such a planet. That is why it can seemingly survive the long periods in
deep space, before returning closer to the sun every 3,000 years or so. It
may take Nibiru as long as 600 years to orbit the sun in close proximity,
as it makes its way out into deep space just like a comet.
But Nibiru was a troubled planet, its atmosphere was disturbed by
some cosmic force, which began to have a devastating effect on the lands,
animals and people. The hardship hit everyone and started threatening the
peace. The harsh rays of the sun were destroying crops and arable land,
making large parts uninhabitable. Nothing new to us on Earth in the 21 st
century? “In the atmosphere a breaching has occurred…Nibiru's air has
thinner been made, the protective shield has been diminished.”
They tried all kinds of remedies to cure the growing gaping hole in
their atmosphere with little success. “In the land strife was abundant,
food and water were not…in the land unity was gone; accusations were
abundant.” We can also relate to the accusations and lack of unity in our
own time, when we compare the way in which the world is disagreeing on
the many issues threatening the environment, greenhouse effect and
ozone depletion. Once again we stare bluntly at the hereditary
characteristics which were passed down to us by the Anunnaki. “Rains
were withheld, winds blew harder; springs from the depths did not arise.”
They called a council meeting and under the advice of some bright
scientists, reached a decision to use gold in a fine powder form to be
dispersed into the atmosphere and patch up the hole. “…to use a metal,
gold was its name. On Nibiru it was rare; within the Hammered Bracelet
it was abundant.”It's important to note that they called the asteroid belt outside of Mars,
the “Hammered Bracelet”. It was known to them from the descriptions in
the Enuma Elish or the Epic of Creation that there was gold embedded in
the many fragments of the asteroid belt. But would they be able to
retrieve it? I trust that in years to come we will rediscover the rich gold
deposits on the asteroid belt which the Anunnaki knew about 500,000
years ago.
“It was the only substance that to the finest powder could be ground;
lofted high to heaven, suspended it could remain.” So while they sent out
space ships to obtain the gold, they also tried to activate the dormant
volcanoes to start “belching” again. “With missiles the volcanoes to
attack, their dormancy to bestir, their belching to increase.” But neither
of these attempts worked while the planet was slowly slipping into an
environmental disaster. The king of the time was weak with little skill to
make weighty decisions. Unhappiness and opposition grew against him
until he was overthrown by Alalu, who took the throne. It was then
discovered that Alalu was actually the successor by law, because he was
the son of the prior king and his concubine half-sister. This is incidentally
where the Biblical succession laws were also derived from. The child of a
man and his half-sister was first in line as successor, not the child of a
man and his unrelated bride. We will see how the Anunnaki applied this
rule on Earth and passed it onto the Hebrews, Egyptians and other
civilisations. But before Alalu's reign could be ordained, a young prince
by the name of Anu presented himself, claiming that he was the direct
descendent of the great king An. They studied his ancestry and came to
the conclusion that he was a pure descendent of An, and therefore by their
laws of seed and succession Anu should be king. After some more
deliberation, it was finally decided that Alalu would remain king and Anu
would be his ‘cupbearer’, in the interest of peace and stability. This was
also a very early example of a coalition parliament.
“Let us live in peace, together Nibiru to abundance return. Let me
keep the throne, let you keep the succession” said Alalu to Anu, and
“in this manner Alalu on the throne remained seated”.
One of his first tasks was to find gold in the ‘Hammered Bracelet’so hedispatched “celestial boats to seek the gold” but space can be a cruel
place, and the mission was a huge disaster. All the space ships which
were dispatched on a discovery mission were destroyed by the asteroids.
“By the Hammered Bracelet the boats were crushed…” After nine Shars
on the throne and very little progress in the relief of the planet, Alalu was
challenged by Anu. As advanced as the Nibiruans may have been in
technology, they certainly had some interesting customs. The ritual was
that the two opponents had to meet each other in hand-to-hand combat,
all naked. That is the way it was written some 4 500 years ago, and also
where the Greeks obtained some of their cultural influences.
“In the ninth Shar Anu gave battle to Alalu. To hand-to-hand
combat, with bodies naked, Alalu he challenged…They grappled
with each other in the public square…”
As fate had it, Anu defeated Alalu and replaced him on the throne of
Nibiru. He had great plans on how to save the planet's atmosphere from
further destruction. Alalu was obviously distraught by the events so he
planned a dramatic act to somehow show his supremacy over Anu. He
‘stole’ one of the advanced space ships and flew out towards the
Hammered Bracelet. “…to the place of celestial chariots he hurriedly
went…into a missile throwing chariot Alalu climbed…the commander's
seat he occupied… That which-shows-the-way he lit up…the fire stones
he stirred up; their hum like music was…Unbeknown to others, in the
celestial boat Alalu from Nibiru escaped.”
His escape was like a final attempt to show that he was smarter, or
worthy of getting some sort of hold over the people of Nibiru, and by
some strange twist of fortune, he achieved just that. He set his course for
Earth, expecting to find gold there. But how would he have known that
earth had an abundance of gold? Once more we find amazingly sobering
information in many of the tablets, with special reference to the Enuma
Elish or Epic of Creation, well-know to historians. It is described in great
detail as a “celestial battle” between gods. In reality it was an observation
from the planet Nibiru, of how a great celestial collision between planets
and moons occurred in the past. This could have only been witnessed on
one of Nibiru's close encounters when crossing the paths of other planetswhile rounding the sun. For the sake of brevity, I will keep this part of the
story short, but you can get a detailed outline in the Epic of Creation.
PLANET OF THE CROSSING
The planet Nibiru is often represented by these two crosses. One (left)
telling us that it was a planet of the crossing which crossed the orbits
of other planets. The other symbol (right) shows that Nibiru was also
a radiant planet radiating its own heat.
This is a story that was written and captured in great detail on clay
tablets. The observations are such, that it could only have happened by
observing the events from the planet Nibiru, which was at the centre of
the collisions, but did not actually collide with anything. Many millions
of years ago, there was Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Tiamat, Jupiter,
Saturn, Neptune, Uranus, Pluto and Nibiru, which came into contact with
the other planets every 3,600 years. That is why the Sumerians called it
the “planet of the crossing” as it crossed the paths of most of the other
planets. Tiamat was a big planet, several times the size of Earth, orbiting
where the asteroid belt is today. On one of her fateful orbits, Nibiru came
very close to Tiamat, so close that their moons actually engaged in
several dramatic cosmic collisions. The book describes these very
dramatically, so that it almost reads like a Greek tragedy, and for those
reasons it has been misinterpreted by many historians and astronomers. A
large body of scholars now realise that it actually describes the cosmic
collisions between Tiamat and her 11 moons, with Nibiru. From the
transcripts we learn that Nibiru had seven moons, which “attacked” the
helpless Tiamat, ripping into her belly, shattering her body, and splitting
her in two. “…into two parts he split her, her chest from her lower parts
he separated.”The outcome of this ‘EPIC’ was that as the moons pounded the planet,
the observers could actually see the many compounds she was hiding.
One of the most abundant metals present was gold. “Her inner channels
he cut apart her golden veins he beheld with wonder.” These were the
collisions on the way towards the sun, and it continued as Nibiru returned
on its way back. As one of the big moons which the tablets call “North
Wind” smashed into Tiamat, it dislodged the top half of the planet which
went flying into space towards the sun. Kingu, which was one of Tiamat's
moons, followed the giant piece of the planet because of its momentum,
before the large piece settled in its own orbit beyond Mars, capturing the
smaller Kingu for ever as its moon. This is the price Kingu had to pay for
its destructive power, the tablets tell us. “Nibiru's Wind upon Tiamat then
hovered, sweeping upon her gushing waters… In a brilliance was
Tiamat's upper part to a region unknown carried. With her the bound
Kingu was also exiled, of the severed part a companion to be.”
The rest of the planet Tiamat was destroyed and smashed into pieces
which became known as the asteroid belt, or Hammered Bracelet, by the
Sumerians. “With his mace the hinder part he smashed to bits and pieces,
then strung them together as a band to form a Hammered Bracelet.”
The other large piece and its new over-sized moon which were now in
collective orbit around the sun, became known as the Earth and its moon.
The Anunnaki through the Sumerian tablets continued to refer to the
moon as Kingu for ever. During these collisions, there was a lot of
transfer of material and 'seeds of life' between all the bodies, which
explains why Earth inherited much of the same life forms as Nibiru. It
also became visible that the new planet Earth was rich in gold as were the
fragments of the asteroid belt. Furthermore it answers the puzzling
question of why the Earth's moon is so large, and why the Anunnaki knew
about the gold on Earth. As time went by Earth stabilized through
gravitational and centrifugal forces, allowing life to develop and flourish.
By the time the crisis on Nibiru started affecting the planet, life was well
evolved on Earth, but more importantly, the Nibiruans knew that Earth
was rich in gold. This is why Alalu set his course for the planet behind
the Hammered Bracelet. They had never managed to travel through theasteroid belt before, and from the tablets we gather that it was a very
dangerous affair. As was described earlier, none of the space ships which
were sent to find gold there, returned. Alalu knew that if he found the
precious metal on Earth, he could almost hold Nibiru to ransom and make
a number of demands. He would be seen as the saviour of his home
planet. Alalu's journey is described so vividly that even 5,000 years later,
one can visualise the imagery described in the clay tablets. I should
remind you that Sumerian tablets often refer to acquiring their knowledge
and information from other sources from the 'prior times' many
thousands of years before the tablets were actually inscribed. We do not
know whether the stories were transferred orally or if they were captured
in some other way, but the amount of information and detail is too
complex to have been a mere oral tradition.
“Riding like an eagle, Alalu the heavens scanned; below, Nibiru was
a ball in a voidness hanging…He looked again, Nibiru's great ball
turned into a small fruit…The next time he looked, in the wide dark
see Nibiru disappeared.”
And so he travelled rapidly towards Earth. It describes his saddened
heart, not knowing what to expect and if he was going to make it alive. It
describes his flight past all the planets as he approached and passed them
from the outside in, marvelling at their spectacle. It describes how he
travelled past Saturn or “Anshar”, “…the foremost prince of the
heavens…” with its “…bright rings of dazzling colour (Saturn)…” Then
Alalu travelled towards the giant “Kishar” or Jupiter, with its “Swirling
storms obscured its face, coloured spots they moved about…” describing
the giant red spot on Jupiter.
It is incredible to witness these perfect descriptions in texts which are
as much as 5,800 years old, and included Pluto, Neptune, Uranus, yet our
‘modern’ civilisation only rediscovered these outermost three planets in
the past 200 years. But then suddenly Alalu was faced by the threatening
asteroid belt. “The Hammered Bracelet ahead was reigning, to demolish
it was awaiting…Of rock and boulders was it together hammered…” As
he approached it, he recalled how the asteroids “…Nibiru's probingchariots like preying lions they devoured”. But somehow Alalu made it
through the belt by using “death-dealing missiles” to blast a way through
the belt. It would become a method of getting through the belt for others
who would come after him. “Like a spell the Hammered Bracelet a
doorway to the king it opened” and so Alalu was on his way past the “red-
brown planet” of Mars before the “snow-hued Earth appeared, the seventh
in the celestial count.” He describes the three regions of the Earth, white
at the top and bottom and blue and brown in the middle. The planet had a
thinner atmosphere than Nibiru and a lesser gravity; “…weaker than
Nibiru was its attracting net.” He used some sort of scanning device to
search for signs of gold as he was approaching from a distance. “The
beam that penetrates downwards he directed, Earth's innards to detect.”
And there it was…the precious metal which was so desperately needed to
save Nibiru's disturbed atmosphere. “Gold, much gold, the beam has
indicated…” Alalu proceeded to land rather ruggedly but “Then he
opened his eyes and knew he was among the living. At the planet of gold
he victoriously arrived.”
After stepping out with his “Eagle's Helmet” he was amazed to find
that the air was good to breath and the protecting “Fish's suit” and helmet
were not necessary. It may sound like a great adventure when told in this
‘romanticised’ fashion, but here was a brave individual alone on a new
planet. That would scare the bravest of adventurers into thinking again.
“No sound there was…Alone on an alien planet he stood…”
MARS AND EARTH FROM SPACEThe polar ice cap is clearly visible on Mars (left) showing that the
planet contains water even today. The swirling clouds and deep blue
colour of the oceans makes Earth (right) a very attractive planet for a
space traveller.
Alalu set himself up in the space ship to be able to survive the elements.
Over the next few days he explored the planet but not without protection.
“He picked up the carried weapon, he picked up the handy Sampler.” He
describes the short days, the sweet smell of the trees, orchards of fruits,
the marshes of green water, the dark-hued soil, and his search for
drinking water. The salt water was not drinkable and filled with fish but
finally he found fresh water in a “silent pond”, where he encountered a
snake for the first time. He did not know what the creature was, and it
must have been the first creature he encountered on Earth, which motived
the Anunnaki to use the symbol of a ‘snake’ in so many applications in
years to come. He did not waste any time before searching for gold with
his “tester”. He found an abundance of gold in the waters of the ocean and
in the banks of the rivers. He urgently sent a message to Nibiru knowing
that he had found the solution to its problems. “The Speaker-of Words he
stirred up…Then to Nibiru words he uttered…On another world I am, the
gold of salvation I have found; The fate of Nibiru is in my hands…”
Anu and the residents of Nibiru were astounded to hear that Alalu was
alive and especially intrigued by his claims about the gold. They were
reminded by the oldest of their wise men, that Alalu had been taught
about Tiamat with her precious abundance of water and gold. It was old
news to him. “Of the watery monster Tiamat and her golden veins he
knowledge acquired; if indeed beyond the Hammered Bracelet he had
journeyed, on Earth, the seventh planet is his asylum.”
It caused lots of excitement and spurred them into action. This was the
point at which the real decisions were taken to send a full expedition to
Earth to verify the claims of gold and establish a base. “If Tiamat's gold
he indeed had found, proof of that is needed; is it for protecting our
atmosphere sufficient?”
The Nibiruans had an incredible ability to turn adversity into stability,a notable trait which we are still trying to master. But the DNA which we
inherited from the Anunnaki will hopefully allow us to achieve this state
of mind. There are however encouraging signs of peacemaking which we
as humans seem to be displaying in great abundance in the 20th and 21st
centuries AD. The bloodless revolution in South Africa and its 180 degree
turnaround from oppression to democracy is one such example and the
‘Orange’ revolution in the Ukraine is another. On many occasions, as we
will see, the Nibiruans diffused conflict situations by simple decisions. It
was however, the children of the Anunnaki who would be born on Earth
in later years, who did not possess the same characteristics of tolerance
and forgiveness as their parents did. It was ultimately their antagonism
and greed which caused the constant conflict between the gods and
rubbed off on the slave species who began to emulate their master gods.
Alalu transmitted the proof of the gold find to Nibiru through a well-
described technological manoeuvre. “Of the Tester its crystal innards he
removed, from the Sampler its crystal heart he took out. Into the Speaker
he the crystals inserted, all the findings to transmit.” Everyone on Nibiru
was astounded by the proof of gold, and started planning the mission to
Earth. Ea (Enki) was King Anu's first born, while Enlil was the second
son, but by way of seed and succession, Enlil held higher rank because he
was the son of Anu and his half-sister. After some serious deliberation it
was decided that Ea and not Enlil would lead the first expedition to Earth
because he was the better scientist. They did a lot of research and
preparation before they sent the ship off. They planned the course… “A
tablet of destinies for the mission he was fashioning.”
There are several references to the fact that they used water as a source
of propulsion. Is it possible that they used the hydrogen in water way
back then, in the same way we are starting to use it in the 21st century?
“If water is the force, where could it be replenished? Where on the
chariot will it be stored, how the force will be converted?” They
assembled 50 ‘heroes’ to embark on the mission and they prepared the
largest chariot for the journey, fitting it out with all the necessary tools.
The day of Ea's departure was very similar to the kind of farewell onesees at the NASA launches; many people gathered to see the launch. Ea
was the last to embark but not before King Anu blessed him and bade him
farewell. “Enlil with his half brother locked arms. Be blessed, be
successful, to him he said.” This was a time when the brothers were
friendly and very little animosity existed between them. This would
however change over the years to come as they took control of Earth and
began to disagree an various issues. What I find incredibly sobering is the
way in which the Anunnaki's behaviour resembled those of humans today.
It feels that we have a lot more in common with them in the 21st century
than humans would have had at any time in the past. It is mainly because
our levels of competence, our scientific discoveries and medical exploits
are almost parallel to what they engaged in all those thousands of years
ago. We are struggling to save our planet from environmental disaster;
we are exploring the other planets in our solar system; and we have
almost mastered the science of genetic engineering. We have however
moved on beyond kingships and monarchy, only to be replaced by a
greed-based capitalist system which does not really promote equality and
stability. The greed gene which I have mentioned on numerous occasions
is clearly visible in our social structures. I wonder how the Nibiruans
handled this issue of greed and social interaction? Are there more lessons
we should be learning from them?
The trip to Earth was not as pleasant as one would have wished for, but
the descriptions of the planets are equally astounding while they were on
their way venturing through the hazardous asteroid belt. This was
obviously a huge hurdle to cross and only one person had done it
successfully before. You can sense from the translations that they were
certainly not at ease with the prospect of crossing the belt. “Beyond the
fifth planet the Hammered Bracelet was lurking.” It took some doing and
a concerted group effort to clear a path for the ship to pass through the
rocks in the belt. What is even more surprising, is the description of how
they used water to disperse the rocks. They even describe how the
boulders were turning as they travel through space, a phenomenon which
we only discovered in recent times. “Toward the host of turning bouldersthe chariot was rushing… the word by Ea was given, with the force of a
thousand heroes the stream of water was thrust.” This was an extremely
inventive technique, pointing to the true genius of Ea the scientist. If he
had used explosive weapons to blast his way through, there would have
been a new threat of fragments hitting the space ship. By using the water
thrusters in a controlled succession, over and over again, they managed
the clear a path in the belt for the ship to pass unhindered. This sounds
like science fiction and yet it comes from clay tablets thousands of years
old. If that does not make you think, nothing will. “And then at last the
path was clear, unharmed the chariot could continue.”
All the ‘path-clearing action’ depleted their water supply and they were
in trouble. On their approach to the sixth planet which they called Lahmu,
and which we call Mars, they saw the planet reflect the Sun's rays. They
realised that there was water on Mars and proceeded to land on it to
replenish their supplies. It is notable that they recorded that gravity on
Mars was not as strong as it would be on Earth later - another fact which
the ancient Sumerians could not have known. At this point in time Mars
still had an atmosphere and they describe the sight from space.
“A sight to behold was Lahmu…many hued it was, snow white was its
cap, snow white were its sandals…There is water on Lahmu, Ea was
saying…The planet's net is not great, its pull is to handle easy…” They
landed with ease on Mars for a short pit stop, on the shores of a lake and
while they were taking in water, Ea made all kinds of observations,
recording them in his book of knowledge. The water was good for
drinking but the air was insufficient for breathing, which means they
needed their “Eagle's helmets” to breathe.
MARSEvidence of water erosion on A clear photograph of the southern
Mars. Just one of thousand of polar cap showing an abundance of
examples showing that Mars water in a frozen from. The
had an abundance of flowing Sumerians already knew 5,000 years
water in the past.
ago that Mars had water. How so?
Soon they departed heading towards their destination, Earth. The manner
in which their flights are described suggests that they must have travelled
at very high speeds. It certainly seems that it did not take them much
longer than a few days or weeks to cover the long distance from Nibiru,
and only a hop and a skip to reach Earth from Mars. We can do a simple
calculation to confirm this line of thinking. Most cars today can easily
accelerate at 10 km/h every second. If our rocket was to accelerate at 10
km/h every second, it would reach 36,000 km/h at the end of the first
hour. In ten hours it would reach 360,000 km/h and after 60 hours of such
constant acceleration we would be travelling at 2,16 million km/h. Mars
is only 78 million km away from us, which means that at our maximum
speed we would take approximately (78/2,16) + 60 hours = 36 + 60 hours
= 96 hours to reach Mars, which is exactly 4 days. I excluded the distance
covered by the space ship during the time of acceleration, but this should
be negated by the time and distance covered by the deceleration on
approaching the planet.
There are probably some oversights according to professional
scientific circles but even if I missed the mark by 50% it would still only
take us 8 days to reach Mars at those speeds. So what is stopping us from
doing this? I would hazard a guess to say that only time is the hurdle at
present. Very soon these hurdles will be overcome and we will be
achieving much greater cosmic velocities.
Ea and his team of 50 explorers approached Earth and the tablets point
out to the reader that they had to slow the ‘chariot’ down before
descending or it would perish in the friction of the atmosphere. More
incredible knowledge of space travel which comes to us from tablets
which are thousands of years old. “The chariot must be slowed or in
Earth's thick atmosphere it shall perish...” said Anzu the pilot to Ea. Theycircled the planet a few times slowing the ship down, before they entered
the atmosphere hurtling towards the solid ground. The gravity was
playing havoc with their ship and they were still moving too fast for a dry
landing. “The Earth's pulling net too powerful for on dry land to
descend…” To avoid any possible damage they splashed down in the sea
where the Persian Gulf is today and opened the hatch. Alalu was waiting
for them and made radio contact as they arrived. “To Earth be
welcomed.” They saw the other space craft from Nibiru at the edge of the
water and knew they were in the right place. Their joy was immense as
they swam and waded their way to dry land where Alalu was awaiting
them. “Alalu toward him came running; his son by marriage he
powerfully embraced. Welcome to a different planet! Alalu to Ea said.”
This is a mere extract of what has been written in cuneiform of the
dramatic events leading up to the first group of settlers on planet Earth
some 443,000 years ago.
ENKI STEPS OUT ONTO THE LAND
Sumerian seal depicting Lord Enki leaving the water and stepping
onto the land for the first time. Notice the streams of water from his
shoulders symbolising that he was also the Lord of the waters. Also
notice the winged deity with radiating beams from his shoulders
awaiting Enki. This was his chief furnace master in the Abzu where
the mining activity took place.
And so we get to the point where the real prehistory of Humankind
begins, long before the first ‘Adamu’ was created, during the “PriorTimes” when only the brave exploring astronauts were on this new planet
Earth. They realised that their mission was one of life or death for their
home planet Nibiru. “On a life or death mission we have come; in our
hands is Nibiru's fate.” There was little time to waste, and after sending a
message to his father Anu back home, Ea mobilised a number of different
teams to perform various tasks. The place where they landed would later
be called Eridu, “The home away from home” the first city on Earth. It
was located in modern Iraq near where Basra is today, on the coast of the
Gulf. Over the next six days they performed miracles. They created a
source for drinking water; they made bricks from clay to build their
settlement; built a camp to live in; examined and recorded the edible fruit
and trees which grew in abundance everywhere; they experienced their
first thunderstorm on Earth with great trepidation; the rain and lightning
and wind was fierce; they were amazed by the moonlight as it lit up the
land and sky at night, and they were even more puzzled by the very short
days and nights. Furthermore they documented the creatures which were
present everywhere, in the sky, on land and in the water. They made traps
for fish and fowl; they built boats to cover the waters with; and they put
up fences around their camp for protection against the fierce beasts they
observed for the first time, and they even brought the “Beam That Kills”
from the chariot to their new camp. This is where the historic events
become very familiar, because on the 7 th day Ea gathered his comrades in
the camp and suddenly the opening words of the Bible take on a whole
new meaning.
“On the seventh day the heroes in the encampment were assembled,
to them Ea spoke these words: Ahazardous journey we have
undertaken… At Earth with success we arrived, much good we
attained, an encampment we established. Let this day be a day of
rest; the seventh day hereafter a day of resting always to be!”
And then the settlers gave their new home a name. “Let this place
henceforth by the name Eridu be called, Home in the Faraway…” and
their new planet was called Ki. Now that they had the base camp
established and they had identified the foods which they could eat, theydid not waste any time before the gold extraction began. The first sources
were the marshes, rivers and oceans. The method they used sounds
similar to the ‘sucking’ method which is still used today in the ocean
beds to find diamonds. Remember that they were searching for alluvial
gold and gold nuggets from any source. So they used “That Which Water
Sucks” and “That Which Spits Out the Water” to pile up the mud and sort
the content. At the end of the week they had all kinds of metals including
iron and copper, but gold was the least amount. “Of the gold the smallest
pile was accumulated.”
Ea was fascinated by the moon and its orbits, which prompted him to
call one circuit a month. “Month to its circuit he gave the name.” The
work continued for a whole year but not enough gold was collected.
While Nibiru was approaching the sun in its orbit, they wanted to
transport the gold to Nibiru at its closest point. It was decided that they
should wait for one more Shar (3600 years) until the orbit brought the
planet back. They brought out the ‘Sky Chamber’ from the space ship and
prepared it for action. With this craft they would have to scan the planet
for new richer deposits of gold. They analysed the planet and identified
where the rich “veins of gold” were hiding. Then they travelled far and
wide to scan the ground below. “In the sky chamber with Abgal did Ea
upward soar, the Earth and its secrets to learn.” We are told how they
flew over mountains and valleys and rivers and vast lands separated by
oceans, making a good record of all their findings. Ea also used this
opportunity to hide the “seven deadly weapons” from the chariot in a
secret place in a faraway land which only he and his pilot knew about.
They were not to be used or abused on their new home.
Anu sent word to Ea that no matter what happened, they needed to ship
whatever gold they had accumulated to Nibiru. It was essential that they
tested the gold dispersion technique which would repair their atmosphere.
But on Earth, Alalu who would take the gold back, was furious that Ea
had removed the weapons from the space chariot. He was going to use
them to blast his way through the asteroid belt. Ea explained that Abgal
knew the way through the belt, as he successfully created a path through
it on the way in. He would pilot the chariot back to Nibiru.Rocket ship?
Could this be an ancient depiction of a rocket ship being filled with
gold and prepared for take-off ? It is clear that parts of it are
underground or in some sort of protective chamber.
So they loaded the gold and prepared for the launch. “Into Alalu's chariot
basketfuls of gold were carried…The chariot's Great Cracker he
enlivened… Then the chariot with a roar heavenward rose, to the heavens
it ascended.” And this is how the first ever shipment of gold left the
newly colonised planet Earth.
The trip back to Nibiru is described in great detail. How they use their
‘crystals’ to locate the pathway through the Hammered Bracelet and we
also get a clear picture of what Nibiru, the radiant planet, looks like when
observed from space. “…in the darkness, in reddish hue glowed Nibiru; a
sight to behold it was.” There was great excitement on Nibiru about the
arrival of their precious gold, they were welcomed by large crowds as
heroes returning from space, very similar to the kind of reception our
astronauts received when they returned from the first moon landing. “A
multitude of populace was there assembled.” The work started
immediately to prepare the fine dust powder mixture which was going to
be dispersed into the atmosphere. The planned experiment turned out to
be a great success. But now they needed more gold…lots more, to deal
with the full extent of the atmospheric damage. “With rockets was thedust heavenward carried, by crystal's beams was it dispersed. Where there
was a breach, now there was healing.” They informed the settlers on
Earth about their success, which caused much happiness. But the 'healing'
did not last long before it was dissipated by the rays of the sun on its
approach. The chariot was assembled and returned to Earth with more
explorers and more equipment to speed up the work. But after another
whole Shar, they only collected a small amount, not enough for Nibiru's
growing problems. Once again Ea traversed the planet searching for signs
of gold but the signals he received all pointed in one direction, to the
southern parts of the planet, where the gold was mixed with ore
underground. “Again and again there was the same indication…Where
the landmass the shape of a heart was given, in the lower parts thereof,
golden veins from Earth's innards were abundant.”
It was at this point that they had to come up with new methods and
technology to separate the gold from the rock and it also very clearly
indicated that the southern part of Africa was the place where this gold
operation was about to take place. Anu sent word giving instruction to
obtain the gold “…from the veins, not from the waters, the gold must be
gotten.” In the meantime they realised that Ea would need help and
guidance with the task, so his brother Enlil was dispatched to join him
and help with the management and command. Once again they surveyed
the lands and saw the rich gold deposits in southern Africa. They called
this part of the world 'Abzu', but the extraction from the rock would be
more difficult. “Let Anu come to Earth, let him decisions provide…” said
Enlil to his brother. The decisions which needed to be made were crucial
for the future success of the operation and would also play a pivotal role
in the relationship between the royal brothers Ea and Enlil. If the activity
was to take place in a faraway land, they would need to divide tasks and
responsibilities. Someone had to oversee the base camp in the north at
Eridu, and the other had to oversee the mining activity in the south at
Abzu. These were the decisions which Anu needed to make. Once again
the Nibiruans surprise us with their simplistic ways of solving complex
problems. After Anu arrived and was shown the vastness of the proposed
operation he offered a solution. They drew lots to determine who wouldperform which task, a custom which the heroes of the Bible inherited.
And so it was decided that Enlil would remain in Eridu and prepare the
landing sites to handle higher traffic of space ships to carry loads of gold
and ensure that the necessary infrastructure was in place to support such
activity. Ea would establish the mining operations with its own control
centre in the south, and devise new tools and methods to maximise the
extraction process. At this point however there were already signs of
friction between the brothers. Ea felt that since he was the first on Earth,
the one who had established the entire place to this point, he wanted to
stay at Eridu and establish the Edin, which would become the lavish
home of the “Upright Ones”. He wanted Enlil to look after the mining in
the south. “Let it the Edin be, abode for the Upright Ones, by this name
be known. The commander of Edin let me be, let Enlil the gold extraction
perform.” Enlil felt that he was the better commander with a superior
knowledge of chariots and sky ships and ports, while Ea was the scientist
and engineer who would be more successful at mining tasks. The wise
Anu realised that any decision would result in unhappiness so the drawing
of lots decided their fate. Ea was sad but accepted his task honourably,
Enlil was satisfied and ready to start developing the space ports and
command centre. To reward Ea for his pioneering work, Anu pronounced
that he would always be known as Enki, the “Earth's Master” from that
moment on; and Enlil would be known as “Lord of the Command”. And
so were the responsibilities and titles allocated to the brothers on a
distant planet, called Earth.But before Anu departed, Alalu challenged him for the throne once
again. They engaged in a wrestling match once more, and once again Anu
was victorious. But in his anger Alalu lashed out at the crotch of Anu who
was standing over him, and in a rage of fury he bit off his testicles. This
was a blow for stability on this new space colony and after deliberation
and contemplation, it was decided not to execute Alalu, but to banish him
to Lahmu (Mars), to spend his time there alone. And so it was done. But
Anzu, the talented pilot, volunteered to take Alalu down to the surface of
Mars in the sky chamber and chose to stay with him until his sickness
‘devoured’ him. There was apparently something in the ‘flesh’ of others
that killed anyone who consumed it. Could this have been an advanced
genetic manifestation which becomes active as the DNA evolves and we
move farther away from primitive species who may have practiced
cannibalism at some stage in their past? Whatever the correct diagnosis
is, it was Alalu's fate to die as a result of swallowing the testicles of Anu
during their hand-to-hand struggle.
The mining and shipping preparations went on with purpose on Earth.
They planned a way station on Mars. You may immediately ask why, but
the answer is quite ingenious and practical, once again pointing to the
knowledge of space travel and the solar system of those early astronauts.
At present we have the ability to take about seven people into space. Any
more than that starts to require much greater thrust and technology
mainly because of the added weight and the effect of gravity. The gravity
on Mars is only about 38% of that on Earth. By sending regular smaller
shipments to Mars, they would be able to send fewer but much larger
shipments from there to Nibiru. Asimple and practical solution.
Enki (Ea) designed a new range of tools and equipment needed for the
mining operation and beamed the designs to Nibiru to be manufactured.
“An Earth splitter with cleverness Enki designed… ‘That which
crunches’ and ‘That which crushes’ he also designed on Nibiru for Abzu
to be fashioned.” We also learn from the texts that Earth was too hot for
some of the Anunnaki, suggesting that Nibiru had a more temperate
climate with the sunshine not nearly as harsh, even when the planet came
in close to the Sun on its orbit. The Sumerian symbol for Nibiru is a'radiating cross' like a 'plus' sign, which indicates that it is not only the
planet of the crossing, but also a radiating planet which radiates its own
heat and energy. The sun is not really required. Several of the other
planets in our solar system also radiate heat and energy but they are
obviously not suitable for life. This extra heat on Earth caused Enlil to
seek cooler parts of the world for himself. “Enlil by the heat of the Sun
afflicted, for a place of coolness and shade was searching. To snow-
covered mountains on the Edin's north side he took a liking.” There in the
middle of the cedar mountains, is where he set up his own home and
started to build the new landing site for their space ships. Was this the
historic Cedar forest in north-east Lebanon? Where Baalbek is situated?
We learn of their technology to excavate and cut rocks to perfect size
with tools not yet known to humans today. It explains the speed and
precision with which they could build giant structures which would
include all of the great pyramids and temples in years to come, in Egypt
and in the Americas. “Above the mountain valley with power beams the
surface he flattened. Great stones from the hillside the heroes quarried
and to size cut. To uphold the platform with sky ships they carried and
emplaced them.” They indicated from the very first building activities
that they liked massive sturdy structures built mainly from stone, which
would last forever. Quite different from the architecture of today. It
clearly explains where the ancient civilisations got their influence and
their knowledge to build the colossal monuments of the past. “With
satisfaction did Enlil the handiwork consider…a structure of everlasting.”
Could it be the hitherto unexplained ancient platform ruins at Baalbek? It
certainly sounds like it. It was so impressive, not even the ancient
Romans knew its purpose, but they used the giant 1000 ton megaliths as a
base to build their Temple of Jupiter.This 1200 ton megalith was left behind by the original builders of the
9-hectare platform at Baalbek. It has not been moved to date because
of its sheer size. Notice the two people, one sitting on top and one
beside it, being dwarfed by the giant stone.
The giant megalithic structure at Baalbek which served as a landing
platform for the celestial ships of the Anunnaki, survived the flood
and became the inspiration for the pyramids. Thousands of years
later the Romans used this platform to build the Temple of Jupiter.A view of the Temple of Jupiter showing the megalithic platform
upon which it was built by the Romans, thousands of years after it
was originally constructed by the Anunnaki under the guidance of
Enlil.
Back on Nibiru, they were ready to send the next celestial chariot to Earth
filled with supplies and tools. They had also lined up a fresh group of 50
additional pioneers, among whom were female nurses and Ninmah, who
was Enki and Enlil's half sister. She was a medical expert with the
knowledge to resuscitate people from the dead. We will find a number of
specific occasions, when in time to come the Anunnaki would revive
individuals back to life. Part of their mission was to stop over on Lahmu
(Mars) and set up a way station for rocket ships from Earth to deliver
regular loads of gold to. It's fascinating to notice the distinct references
the Nibiruans made to Celestial Ships, Rocket Ships and Sky Chambers.
The first seemed to be much larger, used for long distances between
Nibiru and Earth; while the second was smaller and used on shorter trips,
like those to Mars; and the Sky Chamber was seemingly used to travel
around the world and to descend from the large Celestial Ship to the
surface of a planet.Sunset on Mars
The sunset on Mars is reminiscent of a sunset on Earth. When the
planet had an atmosphere and running water, it must have been a
beautiful place in our solar system, for astronauts to spend time on.
By the time they reached Mars, and descended to the same spot next to
the lake where Ea had landed before, they found Anzu, dead. This is the
first time we are really exposed to the scientific or medical knowledge of
the Anunnaki. Ninmah performs a variety of procedures to revive Anzu
and for the first time we witness a dead person being brought back to life.
“From her pouch she took out the Pulser; upon Anzu's heart pulsing she
directed…she took out the Emitter, its crystals' life giving emissions on
his body she directed.” Ninmah repeated this several times after which
Anzu opened his eyes.
Exploring Mars
If this picture of the Mars Explorer digging into a rock on Mars was
shown to people 50 years ago they would not have believed it. Today
we accept this kind of achievement without giving it a second thought.Nothing seems to surprise us anymore. Are we following in the
footsteps of our “maker” on Mars? Will we find evidence on Mars
that will take us by surprise?
We are also exposed for the first time to the “Food of Life” and the
“Water of Life”, which she placed in his mouth and on his lips. Once
revived, Anzu related to them the events which led to the death of Alalu
and how he placed him in a cave.
I have often wondered if NASA knows something we don't, and if they
are actually keeping something from us with regard to signs of intelligent
life on Mars. Because the Anunnaki certainly spent many thousands of
years there and must have left behind visible signs of their presence. The
Sumerian texts tell us a lot about their activity on the planet. Starting
with the death of Alalu, whose body was placed in a cave by Anzu and
Ninmah. Will NASA find the skeletal remains of an ancient astronaut in a
cave on Mars? Anzu described what he did with Alalu's body: “In the
great rock a cave I found, Alalu's corpse therein I hid.” They also carved
a giant image of Alalu on the face of the great rock with their “beams”.
Has NASA already found this image, or will this yet surprise them in the
future? Are the mysterious pyramids and 'Face on Mars' more clues left
behind by the Anunnaki and Igigi on Mars some 400,000 years ago?
The tablets tell us that twenty of the explorers were dropped off on
Mars to set up the base under the command of Anzu, who was declared
their commander by Ninmah, as requested by her father Anu. She
explained that Mars would become a very important stop for the gold
from Earth, and that Anzu would be in command of hundreds of men in
time. One of the things which Ninmah brought to Earth were the
mysterious seeds of a bush which would grow juicy fruits while its elixir
would give the Anunnaki strength, cure disease and keep their mood
happy. “Their ailments it will chase away, happier their mood it shall
make.” Could this plant have had something to do with the Soma plant
which the Vedic poems refer to constantly as a life-giving ‘elixir’ many
thousands of years ago?
Ninmah revealed to Enlil that she bore them a son called Ninurta andthey agreed to bring him to Earth. Because he was the offspring of half-
siblings, he would be highest on the list of succession. In the meantime
the space ships kept arriving with more ‘heroes’ from Nibiru to help
speed up the extraction of gold. Enlil unveiled his master plan to build
five cities in the Edin away from Eridu, which would include a command
post at Laarsa; its twin city called Lagash; on a line extended between the
two he would build Shurubak, the 'Heaven City' and “On the centre line it
shall be located, to the fourth city it shall be leading”…called Nibru-ki.
“A bond Heaven-Earth in it I shall establish.” We can start identifying the
Sumerian language in these names e.g. Nibru referred to heaven, while Ki
referred to Earth. But Enlil's plans were even more elaborate. Beyond the
5th city he wanted to build a “chariot place” to allow ships to come
directly and freely between Earth and Nibiru. He was not a big fan of the
station on Mars from which the main shipping would take place.
At the southern tip of Africa, Enki was building his base to manage the
mining operations in what they called the Abzu. He measured and
surveyed the whole land and even referred to what must have been the
Zambezi river. “… great rivers there rapidly flowed. An abode by the
flowing waters Enki for himself established.” He established a place for
his house and where the 'heroes' would live and “where the bowels of the
Earth to enter… Place of deepness he determined, for the heroes into
Earth's bowels to descend.” Could his domain in the Abzu have been the
mysterious Great Zimbabwe ruins? The descriptions fit it very well. So
far nobody has been able to explain its origins, but the Sumerian tablets
certainly give us something to think about.
And so Enlil commanded the ‘upper world’ which included Edin and
the space ports, while Enki was in charge of the ‘lower world’ or Abzu,
never to be confused with Hell. This was where the precious gold was
obtained which brought the Anunnaki to this planet in the first place. On
one specific day, Anu addressed all the settlers who departed from
Nibiru. There were 600 ‘people’ on Earth and 300 on Mars, who listened
to their King as he praised them. Anu told them that the fate of Nibiru
was in their hands and it was at this point that they were given their loftynames. “Those on Earth are shall as Anunnaki be known, Those Who
from Heaven to Earth Came” and “Those who on Lahmu are, Igigi shall
be named, Those Who Observe and See”. During the rise of Egypt in later
years the Igigi would be known as the “watchers” or Neteru, many of
whom would produce offspring who became pharaohs. They would also
play a crucial role in creating the Aryan civilisation by intermarrying
‘earthling’ females. Anu urged them to do what they could and deliver as
much gold as was possible. Everything was in place and ready to begin
the mining and the shipments. “Let the gold start coming, let Nibiru be
saved,” Anu instructed them.
The fascinating thing is that the Anunnaki never spoke about marriage,
they referred to it as ‘espousal’ which was the process of acquiring a
permanent spouse to procreate with. Enlil and Enki were no different.
Now that they were on this new planet and destined to stay there for a
while, they also found their own spouses, but not before both of them had
sex with their half-sister Ninmah in an attempt to produce a male
offspring who would be eligible for leadership through his preferred
bloodline. Enki took Ninmah, his beautiful half-sister to the Abzu with
him where he tried and tried, but she only bore daughters. Before Enki
came to Earth, he espoused a young princess whose name was Damkina,
but she remained on Nibiru, and gave birth to a son called Marduk. ‘One
in a pure place born’ was the meaning of his name, Enki's firstborn son,
destined for greatness here on Earth. The mother and child only arrived
on Earth much later to join Enki. They had an interesting custom to
change the names of their female spouses to resemble those of the man.
Enki's spouse became Ninki. Is it possible that this was the custom which
we have passed down through the ages and still use in various ways
today? Also wanting a son to be of Earth descent, Enlil seduced a young
girl who eventually became his spouse, by the name of Sud. She bore him
a son called Nannar (Sin), who was the first of the Anunnaki to be
conceived and born on Earth. Sud also changed her name to resemble that
of her male spouse and became known as Ninlil.
Other than Marduk, who was his firstborn by his half-sister, Enki had
five sons from his spouse Ninki and other concubines. They were Nergal,Gibil, Ninagal, Ningishzidda and Dumuzi, the youngest. Enlil's sons were
Ninurta, the oldest, Nannar and Ishkur. And so the dynasty of the
Anunnaki gods on Earth expanded and the complexity of their social
structure grew like a cancer. This involved the hard labour which had to
be performed in the mines of the Abzu; the transporting of the gold to the
space ports of the Edin; and the regular shipments to Mars (Lahmu)
where the smaller base of 300 Igigi orchestrated the larger shipments to
the distant Nibiru. “From the planet Lahmu in celestial chariots was the
precious metal to Nibiru brought.”
In the past few decades a number of leading scientists have proposed
how we could deal with the dwindling ozone problem on Earth. Several
theories and many ideas have been bounced around. I distinctly
remember reading articles which explained how we could disperse certain
substances into the upper atmosphere to create an artificial layer, which
would create a similar effect to the ozone, protecting us from the harmful
rays of the Sun. This is exactly what the Nibiruans did with great success
some 440,000 years ago on their own planet. “On Nibiru was the gold to
the finest dust fashioned, to protect the atmosphere it was employed.”
And from the ancient scriptures we can clearly see that their approach
was working. “Slowly was the breach in the heavens healing, slowly was
Nibiru saved.”
After Enlil completed his colossal space command at Nibru-ki, he
protected it with some sort of deadly weapon. “From there beams were
raised, the heart of all the land they could search…its net unwanted
approach impossible made.” This sounds like the kind of protection
allocated to the most advanced US military base, not what we would
expect to read on a clay tablet from 2500 BC. The Anunnaki had a
number of very mysterious technological items, which we cannot fully
understand, even from reading all their translations. One such item was
what they called the “ME” or “The Tablets of Destinies”. These contained
all the secret formulas and information which basically dealt with all
their knowledge. As if it was some sort of advanced computer system
which could calculate and compute any problem and provide a solution.
They kept this ME in the new safe-house from where Enlil could controlall activity in the Upper World. “With them Enlil comings and goings
oversaw.”
But as time went by, the Anunnaki who worked in the Abzu, extracting
the gold from the mines, began to complain of the hard work they were
being subjected to. The short days and years on Earth somehow also
affected them. So the working Anunnaki were constantly being replaced
by a new fresh group from Nibiru while the exhausted group was allowed
to return home. But the Igigi on Mars were even more restless. Anzu,
their leader “…to Earth from the heavens descended” to deliver the
complaints of the Igigi. They wanted a resting place of their own on
Earth. Enlil tried to pacify Anzu and showed him the full extent of the
global operations. From the mines in the Abzu to the ports in Edin, and
even the secret ME which was in the hallowed chamber in Nibru-ki. But
Anzu was not impressed and he plotted against Enlil. When the moment
presented itself Anzu stole the ME and escaped to the space port where
other Igigi awaited him to stage a mutiny and take over the Earth. With
those ME tablets of destiny, they were basically invincible. But the oldest
son of Enlil, Ninurta offered to capture the rebellious Anzu. A dramatic
aerial battle followed between the two, and with the advice and
experience of Enki, Ninurta captured the unlucky rebel. The ME was
returned and Anzu was executed. Marduk was ordered to return his body
to Lahmu and lay him to rest there as he was the commander of that
planet. This was also the point at which Marduk was appointed as the new
interim commander of Mars and asked to stay there and oversee the
operations. But he was to also look after their well-being and to lift their
spirits.
We know exactly when all of this occurred because the clay tablets tell
us. “In the 25th Shar Anzu was judged and executed.” This means that it
was 90,000 years after the first arrival on Earth, which translates to about
353,000 years ago from present time. It became evident that the
Anunnaki workers were kept on Earth for too long. They needed to be
replaced more frequently. It was the young Ninurta who came up with a
smart plan. Once again we see that their logic, actions and response tosituations are so very similar to how we deal with problems today. It is
truly uncanny. He proposed to build a “Metal City” where they could
smelt the gold to more refined levels. This would allow them to send
lesser volumes of gold to Nibiru, and allow Anunnaki to travel back while
being replaced by new workers. And so it was adopted. In the Edin they
built the city where metal would be smelted and refined and they called it
Bad-Tibira the “Metal City”, making Ninurta its first commander. “The
flow of gold to Nibiru was thereby eased and quickened.” And so the
arrival of fresh Anunnaki from Nibiru continued while the shipments of
pure gold kept going out, helping to restore their atmosphere.
Meanwhile, Enki was not paying attention to the growing unhappiness
among the miners in the Abzu. He was preoccupied with the creatures
that lived in the wilds and he also spent much time in his laboratory
working with ME formulas on a number of projects. “In the Abzu by the
gushing waters, a wondrous study place he erected, with all manner of
tools and equipment he furnished it.” Then Enki involved his talented son
Ningishzidda to work in the lab with him while they used the sacred ME
to unravel new theories. “The house of life he called the place…Sacred
formulas, tiny ME's, the secrets of life and death possessing they
shaped.” It is evident from these texts that the two scientists were
involved in some kind of genetic engineering programme, specifically to
unravel the secret of life and death of the Earthly creatures which they
were studying. These were the experiments which eventually led to the
creation of ‘Adamu’. The tablets describe how Enki was fascinated with a
specific creature which lived among the trees and in the savannah. “They
lived among the tall trees, their front legs as hands they were using.” This
is the first description of a Homo erectus species on Earth. “In the tall
grasses of the steppes odd creatures were seen; erect they seemed to be
walking.” A remarkable entry in clay of new discoveries from some
350,000 years ago, and not long before Homo sapiens made its
appearance on Earth. This fascination with the wildlife on Earth, and not
enough attention to the gripes of the miners, finally caused the uprising.
Enlil arrived in the Abzu to help resolve the problems, but the workers
had had enough. They set fire to their tools, they surrounded Enlil's houseand would not budge. “The Anunnaki stood together: Every one of us
hostilities has declared! Excessive is our toil, our work is heavy, great is
the distress.” The situation was so tense that even Anu was called via
some advanced communication device to give advice. Enki explained to
him that “the lamentation is heavy…every day the complaints we could
hear.” But Anu was steadfast in his pronouncement as he made it clear
that “the gold must be obtained…the work must continue”. After all, their
survival on Nibiru depended on it. It is also fascinating that they make
mention of global warming 350,000 years before we regurgitated it again.
The talk about “Ever since Earth's heat has been rising, the toil is
excruciating…” is a precursor of the looming melting of the poles and the
coming end of the Ice Age which would cause great calamity on Earth. So
they began to negotiate and explored various possible solutions. Maybe
they should send the tired Anunnaki back home; maybe Enki could devise
new tools that were more efficient; it seemed that there was no real
solution to the serious problem; and then came the pivotal moment in all
of human history. Enki consulted with his son Ningishzidda, before they
proudly presented their proposal. “Let us create a Lulu, a Primitive
Worker, the hardship work to take over…Let the Being the toil of the
Anunnaki carry on his back.”
The rest of the gathering was astounded. They had never heard
anything like this before, but they were also unaware of the experiments
which Enki and his son had been performing. They did not believe that a
being could be created out of ‘nothing’ and even the wise Ninmah, their
sister made a statement which would be welcomed by the Darwinians
amongst us. She explained that evolution was the force behind new
species. “One being from another over aeons did develop, none from
nothing ever came.” Unfortunately, the rest of that statement is a bit of a
blow for the religious creationists, because the creation is about to come
in a way very few religious folk would have believed. It does however
deal with the age-old dilemma that we were created in the 'image of our
maker'. Enki was clearly very happy with himself at this point as he
agreed with his sister, that you need a prototype to mould into something
else. He proudly announced to them: “The being that we need, it alreadyexists. All that we have to do is put on it the mark of our essence…A
primitive worker shall be created.” This was a firm declaration that they
had knowledge of genetics and cloning. He explained further “…they
walk erect on two legs…Their forelegs they use as arms, with hands they
are provided…They know not dressing in garments…Shaggy with hair is
their whole body…With gazelle they jostle, with teeming creatures in the
water they delight.” One cannot wish for a more vivid description of
Homo erectus. It feels as if we have been plunged into the middle of a
Jules Verne novel, and yet, these words are the result of a scribe some
4,500 years ago.
Enki demanded that a decision be made, so that he could proceed with
the blessing of all. That would however prove to be much more complex
than one would have expected under their present conditions. At this
point we are also exposed to the moral dilemma which suddenly faced the
Anunnaki about creating another living creature, a new species, and a
‘slave’ to them, which was strictly prohibited according to their
exploration charter. They were not allowed to create new living species
on other planets. Enki took all of those present on a trip through his
“House of Life” where some of these creatures were kept in cages. They
jumped at the passers-by, banging their fists on the bars. “They were
grunting and snorting, no words were they speaking.” Everyone was
astounded by this sight. There were male and female creatures and they
procreated “…like us from Nibiru coming.” Enki was very excited by the
prospects of this new creature, his maverick scientist characteristics were
unashamedly exposed.
“A primitive worker shall be created. Our command will he
understand…Our tools he will handle…To the Anunnaki in the Abzu
relief shall come.”
Enlil was strongly opposed to this idea, and for the first time we hear the
Anunnaki refer to the ‘all mighty GOD’ as Enlil says: “Creation in the
hands of the Father of All Beginning alone is held.” These words should
sound very familiar to those who have been following the controversy
surrounding the cloning issue in the 21st century. There is so muchopposition to proposed cloning of embryos; stem cell therapy; and the
cloning of humans has been prohibited by most nations. And yet, in the
USA the first Pet Cloning company has already opened its doors, to clone
people's dead pets. If you ask me, there is a lot of ignorance surrounding
all of these issues and politicians should keep their noses out of it today,
just like Enlil should have done 250,000 years ago. Ultimately it would
be Enlil's inability to come to terms with this newly created 'slave
species' which led to the conflict between the brothers, the oppression of
the humans, and the disinformation campaign that was imposed by the
vengeful Enlil in an attempt to keep the slave species primitive, ignorant,
obedient, fearful and in its place.
But before they allowed Enki to proceed with the ‘creation’, there was
much deliberation whether GOD would have given them such knowledge,
if GOD did not want them to use it to their advantage. Does that sound
familiar? “Let us with wisdom new tools fashion, not new beings create”
was the one side of the argument. “What knowledge we possess, its use
cannot be prevented” Ningishzidda the young scientist answered. They
even contemplated very deep and spiritual issues like “Is it destiny…or is
it Fate?...That to this planet us has brought…” It was decided to put this
matter before the elders from Nibiru and so it was decreed that a
“primitive worker” would be created. And so began the arduous task of
cloning the first humans by Enki, his very smart sister Ninmah, and his
son the scientist, Ningishzidda, who would lead the team. What followed
was like something from a horror movie, and yet our ancient 'prehistory'
is filled with images of such creatures. Ningishzidda showed Ninmah the
results of many experiments he had been conducting in secrecy. Among
the trees to “…a place of cages” he took her. There were the living results
of various cloning and cross-species experiments he had performed, with
horrific outcomes. “Foreparts of one kind they had, hindparts of another
creature they possessed…Creatures of two kinds by their essence
combined” he showed her.
The creation of the slave species did not happen overnight, it took the
team a long time and many failed attempts to finally achieve the perfect
genetic combination. One can feel their frustration and desperation as oneattempt after another failed. They used the female creatures as the
surrogate mothers, placing a fertilised egg into their womb. The results
were not good. This is where we read about DNA splicing for the first
time in human history. “The two entwined strands separate and combine
an offspring to fashion.” Many times they tried, while constantly aware
that they could only use a small portion of the Anunnaki ‘essence’ to
keep the new being primitive. “To receive our essence in graduation…
Nibiru's essence only bit by bit could be attempted.”
Ninmah prepared the “admixture” or fertilised egg in a ‘crystal vessel’
before inserting it into the female creature. The following text could have
been taken from a modern day scientific magazine, describing artificial
impregnation. And yet once again these astounding words are thousands
of years old, eternally captured in clay tablets.
“In a crystal vessel Ninmah the admixture was preparing, the oval of a
female two-legged she gently placed…With ME Anunnaki seed
containing, she the oval impregnated…The oval back into the womb of
the two-legged female she inserted.” What more do we need to hear to be
convinced that the Anunnaki knew exactly what they were doing, and that
they were indeed performing not only genetic splicing but artificial
insemination into surrogate females? But it took many attempts and
many modifications to the “admixture” to get the results they wanted.
Time and time again offspring were born deformed, deaf, hairy, short
arms, blind, and other defects. It is also evident that they were creating
only males.
“One being had paralysed feet, another his semen was dripping, one had
trembling hands, a malfunctioning liver had another…one had lungs for
breathing unsuited.”
Enki and his colleagues were highly disappointed but they kept on
trying new ways to perfect the ‘primitive being’ till finally a being was
born “In her hands she held the child…it was the image of perfection.”
But their excitement was not long lived. After several years they realised
that the child did not have the ability to speak, its animal genetics were
stronger than its human side. “Of speaking he had no understanding,
grunts and snorts were his utterings.” It was Enki who made theobservation that they have only been impregnating the ‘two-legged’ Earth
females. He suggested that they insert the fertilised egg into an Anunnaki
womb. This caused a long debate about who would be the carrier of the
baby, but it was finally decided that Ninmah should be the carrier and
risk any danger, since it was her project. “The fertilized egg into the
womb of Ninmah was inserted; there was conception.” The gestation
period was an interesting experience. It seems to have taken longer than
the other ‘two-legged’ females but shorter than on Nibiru for the birth to
occur. And finally they achieved what they had set out to do and Enki was
elated. “…The image of perfection he was…He slapped the newborn on
his hindparts, the newborn uttered proper sounds.” I suppose it should be
quite simple to distinguish a human baby from other species, the baby
cries when you slap its bum, just like the doctors do in the maternity
ward. They examined the baby, his limbs, ears, eyes, and found that
everything was perfect. We learn at this point why the Anunnaki referred
to the primitive worker as the “blackheaded ones” because Enki gives a
perfect description of the child. “Shaggy like the wild ones he was not…
dark black his head hair was…Smooth was his skin…smooth as the
Anunnaki skin it was…Like dark red blood was its colour…like the clay
of the Abzu was its hue.”
We learn so much about the very first human on Earth from this short
statement, at the same time we corroborate a number of very important
archaeological and anthropological theories. We know from
Mitochondrial DNA and the Y-Chromosome studies that the first humans
Homo sapiens emerged around 200,000 years ago. It is a widely accepted
fact that the cradle of Humankind originated in southern Africa, and now
we also know what their skin and hair colour was. The parallels between
these clay tablets and the Biblical creation of Adam are uncanny, except
that once again, most of these tablets predate the Bible by at least two
thousand years. But here we discover the terrible truth that will hopefully
jerk us out of the confused state in which we find ourselves as a species!
That our maker was not GOD, but rather an advanced being with
advanced knowledge pretty similar to our knowledge today. And from
that moment on, we saw our maker as a god. The subservience of humanspermeated across the Anunnaki ranks, and as time went by, many of them
would become worshipped, against the liking of Enlil, the supreme
commander on planet Earth.
While examining the baby boy, Enki noticed that his penis had a long
skin hanging from the front end. “Unlike that of Anunnaki malehood it
was, a skin from its forepart was hanging. Let the earthling from us
Anunnaki by this foreskin be distinguished.” And suddenly the ancient
ritual of circumcision takes on a whole new meaning. Is it possible that in
years to come, the human tribes not only circumcised the newborn male
babies not only for hygienic reasons, but also to imitate the gods? To look
a little bit more like them? Because they saw the baby not as a creature,
they decided to give it a name, they called him 'Adamu', “One Who Like
Earth's Clay Is”. And if you have ever wondered where the Aryan blond
and blue eyed people come from, the texts also divulge this information.
In previous chapters we read that Enki had a son who looked just like
him. It describes the baby as 'radiating' and 'bright eyes the colour of the
sky'; and light hair as the 'golden Sun'. It is pretty clear from that
description that the Anunnaki must have had white skin, generally blond
hair and blue eyes. And since Enlil and his followers preferred the cooler
climate of the lands further North, near the snow capped mountains, it
would also explain why the blue-eyed-blond people mostly originate
from that part of the world even today. Further support for this revelation
comes when Ninmah lifts up to hold her new ‘earthling’ baby. “Ninmah
cast her hand upon the newborn's body, with her fingers his dark red skin
she caressed.” We should assume that if her skin was also dark, they
would not have made such a fuss about it in the tablets.
It's very important to recognise Enki’s immediate affinity for his new
‘earthling’ creation. We see the maverick, creative scientist in his
character, who absolutely adored his ‘Adamu’ and almost immediately
wanted only the best for him. This would lead to many disagreements
between him and Enlil, who only saw the ‘earthlings’ as primitive
workers who were created to perform a specific task. But now they had to
face the problem of multiplying this baby many times to create a large
group of workers. The mass production of the ‘slave species’ had begun.Out of the several hundred Anunnaki females, seven volunteers were
found to become surrogate mothers and carry the new species to term.
“Their task is heroic, by them a race of Primitive Workers shall come
into being.” They became known as the ‘Birth Mothers’ and these seven
females became highly worshiped in Vedic poems, Harappan and other
Asian cultures in latter years, often appearing in seals and other pictorial
representations. It could also be the origins of why the number 7 is so
highly revered in so many cultures.
Now that ‘Adamu’ was created as they had wanted, they used his DNA
as the prototype for all the other babies. The seven birth mothers were
each impregnated with fertilised eggs, to carry the foetus to term. It is
fascinating to see that there are seven female deities which were revered
in the Indus Valley and Harappan cultures. The task of giving birth to the
workers was a lengthy process and Enki realised that this was not really
going to solve the problem of creating a substantial labour force of
earthlings.
7 BIRTH GODESSES
Could these representations of the 7 Mother Godesses from the Indus
Valley civilisation be related to the Sumerian stories of the 7 Birth
Godesses who were the surrogate mothers of the first humans?
He proposed that they create a ‘female’ earthling to procreate with
Adamu. “….For males counterparts to be… let them know each other…
as one flesh the two to become… Let them by themselves procreate… By
themselves give birth… Anunnaki females to relieve.” This time they
used Adamu's blood and DNAto create the ‘admixture’ for fertilisationwhile Enki's spouse Ninki became the surrogate mother. In good time the
first female earthling was born, it made human noises, it was healthy and
“her skin smooth was, as that of the Anunnaki in smoothness and colour
it was.” This is a fascinating bit of information, even right from the very
start there was a differentiation in skin colour between Adam and Eve. Is
this why we simply cannot eradicate racism from the face of the world
even today? Is it something so deeply seeded in our DNA that more
evolution is required to overcome this 'race' clash which lingers on and
on? Only time will tell.
Once again they decided that the being needed a name because it was
not a creature. They called her ‘Ti-Amat’, the Mother of Life, which was
also a derivative of the watery planet Tiamat from which Earth was
created during the Epic of Creation. They went on to create another seven
earthling females from the Anunnaki birth mothers, which gave them
seven males and seven females. “Let the males the females inseminate,
let the primitive workers by themselves offspring beget.” They created
cages for them and allowed them to grow up together while observing
them. But Adamu and Ti-Amat were to be excluded from the hard work
of the other earthlings. They were the first ones and were to be protected
for their DNA. Enki took them up to Edin in the Upper World where the
Anunnaki dwelled, to show off the new ‘primitive worker’ to all. A
simple dwelling was built for Adamu and Ti-Amat in an enclosure of
Edin and they were allowed to roam freely in it while the Anunnaki came
from far and wide to observe them. It was probably a bit like an ancient
‘freak show’ with never-seen-before species on display. Even Marduk
arrived from the way station on Lahmu. What took everyone by surprise
was their intelligence and ability to follow commands and perform
simple tasks. Adamu and Ti-Amat led a privileged life in the lush gardens
of Edin. They were cared for, constantly observed and admired by all the
Anunnaki. After all, they were created in their image. Even Enlil who
vigorously opposed the creation initially, was pleased with the outcome.
But those who worked in the mines were most relieved. “Primitive
workers have been fashioned, our days of toil to end” they were shouting.
But their excitement was short-lived because while the two ‘workers’in Edin were being observed; so were the ones in the Abzu being
observed by Ningishzidda, the young scientist. “Conceiving there was
not, birth-giving there was not.” The new species was unable to procreate.
This was not only proving to be a problem for Enki in the lab but also
underground. The Anunnaki miners were getting very restless and losing
their patience waiting for this new ‘primitive worker’ to take over their
toil. Enki and Ningishzidda had to do more genetic manipulation and we
read in great detail what they did. The new species only had 22
chromosomes which did not include the X and Y sex chromosomes; that
is why they could not procreate. How on Earth could an ignorant scribe
4,500 years ago have had such detailed knowledge about genetics? “Like
two entwined serpents Ningishzidda the essence separated…Arranged
like twenty two branches on a Tree of Life were the essence…The ability
to procreate they did not include.” Then the young Ningishzidda
performed a dangerous procedure which included the ribs of the
individuals and which was rewritten in the Bible some time later with
some variation. He sedated Enki and Ninmah extracting the missing “sex
essence” from each one, implanting it into Adamu and Ti-Amat. “To their
Tree of Life two branches have been added… With procreating powers
their life essence are now entwined.” From that moment on all humans
had 23 pairs of chromosomes.
The two were allowed to roam freely in the orchards of Edin while
their creator Enki tried to teach them some basics of intelligence. He
clearly wanted his new ‘species’ not to be too primitive; not to evolve as
a slave; he wanted to uplift them with knowledge. Enki's symbol was the
entwined serpent which is still used as the symbol for medical doctors
today. It was this imagery which has led to the ageless confusion between
the maker and the ‘evil serpent’ who tempted Adam and Eve in the
garden of Eden. The story is somewhat simpler and more logical if seen
from the point of the Sumerian tablets. Enlil was furious about the
‘slaves’ being able to procreate on their own. This was never part of the
plan. Now they have not only created a new species which was not
supposed to happen, but they have given them the essence of intelligence
and life which the Anunnaki possessed.SUMERIAN TREE OF LIFE EGYPTIAN TREE OF LIFE
The tree of life referred to by the Sumerians was actually the DNA.
Here we have two deities manipulating the DNA-Tree-of-Life with a
winged deity or a winged disc observing them from above. Such
winged deities are common in ancient depictions and have been
adopted by various religious groups like Zoroastianism. Similar
representations of the DNA in the form of a Tree of Life are found
throughout ancient civilisations.
And this part of the scriptures points irrefutably to the genetic
manipulation performed by the Anunnaki which stunted our DNA,
causing many of the undesirable and unexplainable characteristics among
humans today; the fact that we die, that we get sick and other undesirable
side effects associated with an incomplete genome. Ningishzidda
comforted Enlil by explaining that he did not give the new species the
gift of eternal life. “Knowing for protection they were given… The
branch of long living, to their essence tree was not.” This statement
explains why the Anunnaki lived so long, or even eternally and why they
could be revived from the dead. It also suggests that they must have
performed more genetic engineering on humans after this point, because
it is clear from other scripts that the early humans lived very long lives,
unlike humans today.
Enlil could not be pacified and he proclaimed “Then let them be where
they are needed…In the Abzu away from the Edin, let them be expelled.”This story is well know as the ‘Fall of Adam’ in the Bible. There are also
some other fascinating similarities when Enlil was walking in the shade
of the trees in Edin looking for the two earthlings, wanting to see how
they were getting on. By that stage they had already been taught various
things by his brother Enki and they were aware of their nakedness.
Wanting to be more like their maker, who wore clothing, they began to
emulate him. This was a dead giveaway to Enlil that someone had been
feeding them knowledge and information which he was decisively
opposed to. It was at this point when he expelled them from Edin for
becoming too informed, and a stern threat was extended to the human
couple not to consort with the ‘evil serpent’ and not be led astray by his
attempts and promises of knowledge and other things. So it turns out that
the serpent was actually Enki, who was the maker, the ‘creator’ of
Humankind who was personified as the devil by Enlil, while from that
moment on, Enlil became the ‘god of fear and vengeance’ who did
everything in his power to oppress and control humans. He was very clear
about the limits to which he would allow humans to develop. He chose
his favourites, punished those who would not listen to him, and prevented
humans from worshipping any other god than him, although the other
gods had much more regular contact with humans, which led to them
being worshipped in any case. But in time, Enki's oldest son Marduk
would take over this vengeful god role when he proclaimed himself the
‘god above all’.
In the Abzu, all the earthlings were procreating, which included Adamu
and Ti-Amat. “With wonderment did Enki and Ninmah watch the
newborns… How they grew and developed was a marvel.” They
comprehended commands, did not complain about the heat and dust and
worked hard for rations of food. Finally, after a whole Shar (3,600 years)
the Anunnaki were relieved of the toil in the mines, while back home on
their planet, Nibiru's atmosphere was healing. The earthling workers in
the Abzu grew in numbers quickly, working in the mines and as servant-
slaves to the Anunnaki. But in the north or the “Upper World” the
Anunnaki were also growing in numbers. Enlil and Enki's sons had
offspring with some of the nursing Anunnaki females who arrived fromNibiru.
By now the settlers from a distant planet had been on Earth for around
240,000 years. They had established a stable infrastructure to perform the
arduous task of mining gold for their home planet Nibiru and they had
grown in numbers, which now included many Anunnaki who were born
on Earth and had no knowledge of Nibiru. This is quite an interesting set
of variables. We are also told that their stay on Earth had sped up their
aging process. “By lifecycles of Nibiru they were endowed, by Earth's
cycles they were quickened.” This means that the children grew up
quicker on Earth. The larger community of Anunnaki made life a bit
easier on them because they could now divide their chores among more
individuals. The biggest achievement was the creation of the ‘slave
species’ which was working out well. The new species performed all the
lowest and the toughest tasks, and so the ‘earthlings’ were in great
demand by the Anunnaki. Those must have been very interesting times on
Earth while the settlers lived in a kind of utopian paradise. After all, they
were on a mission which was planned, supported in many ways with
technology from ‘home’ and most importantly, it was funded and
provided for with everything they needed. It was a fully functional
‘communist’ system where all of them worked together for a collective
benefit. The settlers did the work required and in return they were
provided with everything they needed. They were even allowed to break
longstanding rules of the Nibiru civilisation by creating a cloned slave
species to perform the hard labour. There is no reference to money or
currency or the need to pay for something until long after the flood some
11,000 BC. It was the perfect community of settlers, everyone with his
own task, contributing to the greater benefit of all the Anunnaki, feeding
everyone and providing for everyone in every way. The slave species
became an inextricable part of the full cycle of activities on Earth. But
they were functioning within their own little sphere which was swallowed
up by the larger Anunnaki sphere of activity. As slaves they were not
paid, but they were housed and fed and clothed by the Anunnaki.
Enlil had twin grandchildren called Utu, a boy, and Inanna, a girl, who
would become Ishtar, the goddess of love in many cultures, by manynames. But the climate on Earth was changing and causing great havoc.
We are even told about the Antarctic meltdown prior to the last Ice Age.
“Upon the Earth the warmth was rising…Vegetation flourished…The
rains were heavier…Rivers were gushing …The snow white parts to
water were melting…volcanoes were fire and brimstone belching…In the
Lower World the snow white-hued place the Earth was grumbling.”
But the disturbance on Earth was arriving from the cosmos too as
Nibiru was on her way to round the Sun. “In the heavens Nibiru was
approaching, the Sun's abode it was nearing.” This particular time the
planet got a little too close to the asteroid belt, its gravity causing many
rocks to be dislodged from their stable orbit causing them to collide with
the inner planets which included Earth. But it was Mars and the moon
that were most affected. Marduk who was stationed on Mars was very
nervous and was complaining to Enki about the situation. “From the
Bracelet bits and pieces it has been displacing.” Mars, Earth and the
moon were bombarded by meteors causing havoc and panic and much
damage. “In the Hammered Bracelet turmoils are occurring…Upon the
Earth brimstones from the sky were falling…Like stony missiles the
Earth they were attacking…The faces of all three with countless scars
were covered.”
It is fascinating to discover that after the original ‘celestial battle’
collisions between the planets and moons which created the Earth, there
must have been more collision each time Nibiru came past the Sun, but
eventually this stabilised allowing life to develop. But cosmic collisions
are inevitable and the balance must have shifted in our own solar back-
yard which caused these sudden disturbances affecting the asteroid belt.
The tablets describe how a giant comet or asteroid came close to the
Earth, while flying on a collision path with Mars. It describes the rogue
celestial body dramatically. “From horizon to the midst of heaven like a
flaming dragon it was stretched…One league was its head, fifty leagues
in length it was, awesome was its tail…By day the skies of Earth it
darkened.” This is a pretty awesome description of what was actually a
giant comet, which must have been a similar experience to the Comet
Shoemaker-Levy in 1994, which we all witnessed crashing into Jupiter.But this one was much closer and way back then, somehow the moon got
in the way and took the full impact of the comet. It is possible that the
impact which is described by the Sumerian tablets caused the giant crater
on the moon, which can still be seen with the naked eye today. You be the
judge, this is what it says: “To intercept that dragon in its path Kingu
(moon) was making haste…Fierce was the encounter, a tempest of clouds
on Kingu was raised…By its foundations was Kingu shaken.”
But as Nibiru made its turn around the sun and disappeared into deep
space, everything subsided again and life returned back to normal on the
fragile outpost of the Anunnaki. They surveyed the land from their sky
ships to assess the damage, around Edin and north to the cedar mountains
where the command post was, to the landing places and all their other
cities. They scanned to ensure the gold mines were not affected – they
were saved. However, the damage to Mars was severe. Marduk reported
that the atmosphere was damaged and Enlil agreed that the stability of the
base on Lahmu was questionable. They would build a new space port in
the Edin on Earth to send ships directly to Nibiru. “Achariot place in the
Edin must be established…The way station on Lahmu is no longer
certain.” There have been many theories by scientists about what may
have happened to Mars in the past. Today, from the diagnoses by the
rovers on our neighbour, we have irrefutable proof that Mars had water,
oceans, lakes and rivers and even an atmosphere. There is still ice present
today and all it really needs is an atmosphere to stabilise the
environment. The Sumerian tablets certainly go a long way in supporting
this line of thinking, but the lack of atmosphere and the 'peeled away'
crust of virtually one half of the planet have caused much speculation. Is
it possible that the descriptions in the tablets are the actual event which
'killed' Mars? Firstly she was bombarded by giant asteroids which may
have dislodged much of the peeled away surface, as is suggested by some
scholars, before the close proximity of the much larger Nibiru caused
dramatic gravitational disturbances which may have caused the loss of
the atmosphere and a large part of its crust. We are told that all of this
occurred around 80 Shar since their splashdown on Earth. That would
make it 288,000 years after arrival and 155,000 years ago from ourpresent time. It will be fascinating to see what evidence the Mars probes
find of the meteoric activity on our neighbouring planet.
After this calamity had subsided, Anu gave instruction to build a space
port on Earth. “Let a place of Celestial Chariots in the Edin be
established.” But before they rushed to do that, Enki and Marduk wanted
to survey the moon as a possible alternative to Mars, with its much lower
gravity for a possible base there. “Eagles' helmets” they had to don, the
atmosphere was for breathing insufficient…For a way station it is
unsuitable.” But the two stayed there for some time while Enki mapped
the heavens, he was taken by the beauty of Earth from the moon and once
again we hear the Anunnaki make reference to the almighty GOD. “The
Earth like a globe in the void by nothing is hanging…Are you not by the
celestial dance of Earth and Moon and Sun enchanted?...With our
instruments we can scan the distant heavens…The handiwork of the
Creator of All in this solitude we can admire.” With this statement we get
another glimpse at Enki's creative spirit which was diametrically opposed
to his brother's, who was a true commander and politician. They did a
great deal of astronomical observation while on the moon and the tablets
describe them as they captured much of their newfound knowledge of the
cosmos from there. The circuits of the planets around the Sun indicated to
Enki that “Nibiru of the Sun not a descendant” was, like the other planets
in the solar system. Many modern day astronomers may find this bit of
information useful when making pronouncements and formulating
theories on the mysterious planet X. Enki pointed out that there was a
family of 12 with the Sun and he designated a station to each one by
name. After this “twelve constellations by their shapes he allotted…The
stars into twelve constellations he assembled.” Is this is how we inherited
the signs of the Zodiac?
Marduk used this quiet time with his father Enki to pour his heart out.
He was bitterly disappointed about his position and role among the
Anunnaki. He was Enki's first-born and yet he had not been given any of
the higher responsibilities on Earth. It was at this point we can sense that
Marduk was becoming a loose cannon who would cause a lot of trouble in
time to come. Enki promises him that “…which I have been deprivedyour future lot shall be.”
The continuing harsh climate on Mars and unsuitable conditions on the
moon forced the Anunnaki to build “Bird City” at Sippar in the Edin.
Now they would be able to fly their ships directly to Nibiru from Earth,
without having to stop on a way station. “In the eighty second Shar was
the construction of Sippar completed...” and Anu travelled from Nibiru to
see the latest developments. The Anunnaki from the Abzu were
assembled and even the Igigi were called in from Mars for the occasion.
We learn about the singing and dancing skills of Inanna, the goddess of
love, Anu's great granddaughter. A new era had arrived on Earth, the gold
would be sent directly to Nibiru and once they had collected enough in
storage, the “heroes and heroines” would be able to return to Nibiru. “A
few more Shar of toil, and homeward they shall be bound.” The Anunnaki
were excited about the prospects of ending their stay on this planet and
returning home. But their anticipation was too hasty. The hard work in
the Abzu continued, the Anunnaki in the Edin were growing restless. It
was they who now demanded help from the slave species. But while Enlil
and Enki were deliberating such prospects, Ninurta flew down to the
southern tip of Africa and captured some earthling slaves for his
Anunnaki friends in the Edin. Thereby starting a never-ending tradition of
slavery from Africa, which would haunt modern man for millennia to
come. The events are described dramatically in the tablets: “In the forests
and the steppes of the Abzu the Earthlings they chased...With nets they
them captured, male and female to the Edin they them brought.” This
sounds like a scene from the 17th century when slavery became one of the
most profitable businesses in the world and when African slaves were
captured like wild animals to be shipped and sold in distant lands. And
yet, this was happening some 150,000 years ago. It is amazing how
strongly the Anunnaki genetic code has embedded itself in our DNA, still
playing havoc with our behaviour today.
Enlil was furious once again, because he explicitly expelled the
Earthlings from the Edin. But Ninurta his son convinced him that the
slaves would pacify the restless Anunnaki in the north and prevent arepeat of the revolt which took place in the mines of the Abzu. They let
the situation simmer, as they all believed that they would be heading
home to Nibiru very soon. “Let the gold pile up quickly, let us all to
Nibiru soon return.”
The Anunnaki in the Edin were very impressed with their new slaves.
They showed intelligence and could perform all tasks given to them.
“Intelligence they possessed, of commands they had understanding.” The
slaves took on all kinds of chores, all working naked for their gods. As
time passed, the numbers of earthlings grew so quickly, they
outnumbered the Anunnaki by many and very soon the food supplies
began to dwindle. The slaves would constantly scavenge for food
everywhere, in the wild and in the orchards. These were days long before
domestication of animals, keeping of herds, growing of crops and
understanding of farming by the humans. Those secrets would only be
revealed to the slaves after the Great Flood, in many years to come. Enlil
was still harbouring negative feelings toward the slaves and he made it
clear that Enki should deal with the problem which he created. So Enki
started scheming. He observed the earthlings only to discover that they
were somehow regressing towards their wild origins. He planned to create
a civilised man out of them, but he was not quite sure how to go about it.
There was already enough arguing about all the genetic experimenting
and cloning. He had to do this less conspicuously. What he did has
become another story which was repeated in the Bible around the birth of
Moses. Enki impregnated two young Earthling females, who bore a son
and a daughter. The tablets tell us that he was ecstatic. “Who such a thing
has ever known… Between Anunnaki and Earthling, conception was
attained…Civilised man I have brought into being.” He told his spouse
that he found the babies floating in a basket on the river by the reeds and
took the children to raise as his own. And just as Moses was raised as the
son of the Pharaoh, they became known as “The Gracious Ones” growing
up as the children of the Lord of the Earth. They were born in the 93rd
Shar, which was 334 800 years after arrival on Earth, 108,000 years ago
from present time. They were called “Adapa – The Foundling” and “Titi –One with life”. By this action Enki personally created the first Homo
sapiens sapiens, and secured their future as a new civilised species to
multiply on the planet.
“Civilised man I have brought forth…A new kind of Earthling from
my seed has been created, in my image and after my likeness.”
These are some of the most important words in my entire substantiation
of the 'god-devil' argument. Since Enki was the creator of the original
Adamu and once again Adapa, the first civilised human, he should be
credited as the creator. But his brother Enlil described him as the
deceitful and evil 'snake' and the 'devil' who humans should stay away
from. Enlil was for all intents and purposes the supreme commander of
planet Earth, who not only declared himself to be their god, but was
perceived to be their god. On Earth Enlil's word was supreme.
THE CREATORS
Neo-Sumerian on clay, Babylonia, 1900-1700 BC. One of various
creation stories captured on clay. This text is unique and different
from the story which introduces the “Creation of the Hoe” and the
Neo-Babylonian Epic of Creation or Enuma Elish.
Tablet translation:
“IN DISTANT DAYS, IN THOSE DAYS, AFTER DESTINIES HAD
BEEN DECREED, AFTER AN AND ENLIL HAD SET UP THE
REGULATIONS FOR HEAVEN AND EARTH, ENKI, THE
EXALTED KNOWING GOD, LIKE A HIGH PRIEST WITH WIDEKNOWLEDGE, ENLIL-BANDA, IN THE LANDS WAS THEIR
RULER. BY THE RULES FOR HEAVEN AND EARTH, THE FIXED
RULES, HE SET UP CITIES. - HE DUG THE TIGRIS AND THE
EUPHRATES. THEREUPON HE ESTABLISHED THE RULES OF
THE LANDS. HE SET UP HAND-WASHING RITES, HE SET UP
LIBATIONS …”
This supreme god of Humankind was fierce and brutal, as is seen
throughout the Old Testament, punishing humans for disobedience, but
also rewarding them for being loyal. Rewarding his chosen few with
physical possessions like land, gold, horses, livestock and more. If you
have ever wondered why we humans are so materialistic, herein lies your
answer. Enlil was the god who manipulated humans to do exactly what he
wanted. The god of the Bible and all other manmade religions. He never
even gave Humankind the chance to evolve into a state of consciousness
where they could understand the bigger picture of the universe. Instead he
manipulated humans from their very beginnings into believing that he,
Enlil, was the almighty GOD, creator of the universe and all things in it.
So if Enlil, our god, was the brutal one, should he not be called the devil?
For making false representations of himself to an ignorant species barely
emerging from the cradle, confused about their purpose among the
living?
When I say that god is the devil, and the devil is our maker, it should
be seen in this context. Enlil should be classified as the devil for
misrepresenting himself as god; and Enki, who was portrayed as the
‘snake-devil’ was actually the one who created us…our maker. Enki was
the only one of the Anunnaki who consistently looked out for our best
interests, who tried to give humans knowledge and intelligence in Edin,
who taught us most of the skills we possess today, and the one who saved
humans from the Great Flood when Enlil and the others agreed to let the
water wipe out all humans from the Earth.ORIGINS OF MEDICINE
The symbol used by the medical industry today can be traced back to
early Sumerian symbolism. The wings represent a god or deity with
superior knowlege; the serpent symbolises Enki and the double helix
of the DNA.
Adapa and Titi were brought up as little Anunnaki children, Enki and
his spouse Ninki taught them all the skills of the Anunnaki. Satisfied that
the new kind of earthling was in fact civilised and intelligent, he ordered
the delivery of all kinds of seeds and domestic animals from Nibiru, so
that the earthlings could grow food and learn farming. “Let us from
Nibiru seeds that are sown bring down…Ewes that sheep become to Earth
deliver… farming and shepherding teach…By civilised man let Anunnaki
and Earthlings become satiated.” He was going to enable the Earthlings to
provide food for the Anunnaki and themselves. This knowledge was
however reserved only for a small privileged group of Earthlings, who
were closely associated with the Anunnaki and whose responsibility it
was to feed their masters. The mass civilisation of the slave species
would only happen much later.
Both Enlil and Anu were amazed that a civilised man could evolve so
quickly from a more simple Adamu. Once again they refer to evolution
before they voice their surprise. “That by life essence one kind to another
leads is not unheard of…That on Earth a civilised man from the Adamu
so quickly appeared, that is unheard of.” It is evident from this statement
that the Anunnaki were well-acquainted with the concept of evolution,
but they also knew how long it took for species to evolve. As unhappy as
Enlil was with the original idea of a slave species being created, hesuddenly saw the merits of the more intelligent, civilised man, who could
perform more delicate tasks. Especially that of farming and cultivating
food for all of those on Earth. Their excitement rose even higher when
Adapa and Titi had their first children, which turned out to be twins. Anu
was so impressed by the reports about Adapa, that he ordered him to be
brought to Nibiru for a visit. “Let Adapa the Earthling to Nibiru be
brought.”
A very important trip to Nibiru was planned to show off the amazing
earthling who could speak, read and behave appropriately, to Anu and all
other inhabitants. Once again Enlil was not pleased with this plan. Not
only have they endowed him with all their knowledge, but now they will
take an Earthling into heaven, to become just like them? “With
knowledge endowed, between Heaven and Earth will travel.” But the
command of Anu could not be avoided. Enki's two sons Ningishzidda and
the youngest Dumuzi were chosen to accompany Adapa and visit their
parents' planet for the first time. Anu wanted to bestow immortality on
Adapa to include him in the extended family of the Anunnaki but Enki
had other thoughts. Adapa was his creation by his own seed and a ‘mortal
earthling’ with more Anunnaki blood than Adamu who was created first.
Adapa had to remain an earthling on his own planet Earth and face death
as all other earthlings. Creating a new species was one thing, but creating
an immortal species was not on the cards.
As they took off, the tablets describe Adapa's fear of flying for the first
time, wanting to go back, while being pacified by Ningishzidda. “The
lands they saw, by seas and oceans into parts separated… Adapa agitated
was, he cowered and cried out: Take me back.” This was one the earliest
events of human flight ever recorded, describing clearly the geographical
features in a way possible only when viewed from a great height. The
events which took place on Nibiru upon their arrival, sound like a science
fiction story along the lines of ‘The Alien Who Came to Dinner’. So as
Adapa was admired and quizzed by Anu and the entire city who came to
see this new ‘civilised’ alien from another planet, he was offered various
items to eat and drink. When he refused, it surprised Anu and annoyed
him somewhat, that this earthling would refuse the gift of immortality.Then came the twist where fiction imitates life. We discover that the
Anunnaki had some awesome technology that we do not really understand
today. It allowed them to convey or transmit secret encoded messages.
Before they departed from Earth, Enki gave Ningishzidda an encoded
tablet for Anu. “Anu the tablet's seal broke open…into the scanner the
tablet he inserted…its message from Enki to decipher.”
It explained the heritage of Adapa, that he was the son of Enki from an
earthling female and had to return to face his destiny on Earth. “To be of
civilised man a progenitor his destiny shall be.” Anu then immediately
declared that “the welcome to the earthling must not be overextended, on
our planet he cannot eat and drink. Let his offspring there on Earth fields
till and meadows shepherd.” Dumuzi was asked to stay on Nibiru while
Ningishzidda returned to Earth with Adapa, bringing with them seeds to
be planted. Dumuzi would bring the lambs and ewes on his return.
Enki confessed to his sister Ninmah and Ningishzidda about Adapa and
Titi being his offspring, stressing that by his actions he secured the
survival of the Anunnaki. Civilised earthlings would relieve more of their
hardship, they will be taught to produce the food to keep everyone alive
during the hard times. But once again, his brother Enlil's fury was
immense. This is where the Anunnaki begin to debate destiny and fate as
a philosophical inevitability. “So did Enlil in anger say. Now the lot is
cast, destiny by fate is overtaken.” All the way through many of these
translations we are left with a very strange mixture of spirituality,
awareness of the Creator of All things, advanced technological expertise
and know-how. And yet, the Anunnaki themselves showed visible signs
of a species still on the path of evolution. I personally get the distinct
impression that their genome was not as evolved as we may have
believed at first sight. It is possible that it was indeed fate which brought
them to Earth to create humans, who would unravel the mystery of their
own ancestry which stretched all the way back to another planet called
Nibiru. But I have already shared my thoughts on the evolution of the
genome with you. I propose that evolution happens exponentially, and in
a few thousand years we would have evolved to the same level the
Anunnaki were when they created us. They, however, have probablyevolved way beyond our present levels of comprehension, and that may
have something to do with the many UFO sightings, visitations and
abductions which are reported recurrently. Is it possible that since they
have deserted planet Earth, the Anunnaki keep coming back to check up
on their creation, and possibly help steer us in the right, or wrong
direction?
Meanwhile Adapa's female partner Titi, gave birth to twin sons. They
called them Ka-in and Abael, showing us that once again, those who
rewrote the story in the Bible many thousands of years later, got it
completely wrong. It was not Adam and Eve who had Cain and Abel, it
was the first civilised couple on Earth who had the troubled sons. Ka-in
was taken under Ninurta's wing to his city of Bad-Tibira, to be taught
everything about farming the lands, digging canals, ploughing, planting
and harvesting crops and was known as “He Who in the Field Food
Grows”. Marduk took the other son Abael, “He of the Watered Meadows”
and taught him everything about building enclosures for his animals,
feeding them and caring for them. We are reminded about the very long
lives which these early humans lived because it was a whole Shar before
Dumuzi returned from Nibiru bringing with him mainly sheep and other
four-legged domesticated animals for farming. “Never before was there
an ewe on Earth, a lamb has never to Earth from heavens been dropped.”
Under the leadership of Ninmah, the Anunnaki built what they called
“the Creation Chamber” where “the multiplying of the grains and ewes on
Earth begun.” When the first crops and sheep were harvested by Ka-in
and Abael, they were called before Enlil and Enki and we witness the first
ever offering to the gods by humans. Enlil proclaimed that, “Let there be
celebration of firsts...” and for the first time in a long time he was pleased
with the humans. This mentality of subservience and offering would be
imposed on the humans for thousands of years by Enlil and other
Anunnaki gods, forcing them to make sacrificial offerings as a sign of
obedience. Those must have been tough times on Earth as the production
of food was not sufficient to feed the large numbers of Anunnaki and
humans, in the Abzu and in the Edin. Fish and fruit were clearly not
enough. It was only after the introduction of the new seeds of a widevariety of agricultural produce that the food crisis was alleviated among
the Anunnaki and humans.
The subtle competition among the cousins Ninurta and Marduk rubbed
off on the earthling brothers Ka-in and Abael. They began to argue about
who had the more important job, displaying typical human traits so early
in human history. It was not long before their subtle competition turned
into more visible rivalry and when the climate changed and times became
hard on the farmers, their rivalry turned to manslaughter. Abael's sheep
found the green fields of Ka-in irresistible and invaded them to graze on.
Suddenly their petty arguments turned into a heated confrontation. The
brothers got into a physical fight over their lands and in a fit of fury Ka-
in hit Abael with a stone, killing him. “Ka-in a stone picked up, with it he
Abael in the head struck…Again and again he hit him until Abael fell, his
blood from him gushing.”
We see the first evidence of human remorse and grieving at this point.
When Adapa and Titi found out about the tragedy they behaved the way
some people still do today. “A great cry of agony Titi shouted, Adapa
spread mud on his face.” Although Ka-in was remorseful, it was too late.
There was much deliberation and argument among the Anunnaki about
how they should deal with the situation. The decision did not come easily.
In the end, Ka-in was judged by the Anunnaki and expelled from Edin to
live in solitude in distant lands, to fend for himself. “From the Edin you
must depart, among Anunnaki and civilised earthlings you shall not
stay…To the ends of the Earth let him be banished.” The Bible tells us of
the days that the Nefilim were on Earth…and the sons of the gods saw the
daughters of man and had sex with them and so produced a new sub-
species which became the Aryans. Obviously the Bible does not put it in
so many words, but I believe we have now reached the point where that
particular biblical phrase begins to make much more sense.
In the 95th Shar Adapa and Titi had another son whom they called Seti,
the biblical Seth, but the first civilised couple did not stop there. “Thirty
sons and thirty daughters Adapa and Titi had.” These human offspring
were tillers and farmers who grew in numbers and provided all the foodrequired on Earth. In the 97th Shar, Seti had a son called Enshi, which
meant ‘Master of Humanity’. Enshi was taught writing and counting by
Adapa, he was taught about the Anunnaki and Nibiru, after which he was
taken to Nibru-ki by the son of Enlil and showed anointing with oils, and
how to extract the elixir from the Inbus fruits. This was also an important
turning point in the relationship between humans and Anunnaki, when
man began to call them ‘Lord’. “It was since then that by civilised man
the Anunnaki Lords were called...” and the beginning of true worshipping
of the Anunnaki. The civilised humans were also taught how to make
fires with bitumen, how to operate the kiln and furnace, smelt metals and
refine gold. They were taught how to make instruments and play music
and sing, and even how to dig wells for water. The humans liked to gather
at the water to socialise and it was there, where much interaction between
males and females took place with lots of sexual activity, leading to the
rapid growth in their numbers. We still seem to display the same
behaviour as water always attracts loads of people. Whether it's the beach
or a riverbank or even a pool in your backyard, people have always been
attracted to water. And this is the part of the clay tablets which was
copied into the Bible by the biblical writers thousands of years later,
confusing virtually all scholars and theologians alike when they refer to
the Nefilim. These were the days during which “…the Igigi to Earth were
more frequently coming” from Mars. Marduk and the rest of the Martian
Igigi “…what on Earth was transpiring they increasingly desired.”
The time of human expansion had arrived on earth. More and more
humans were being born as descendants of Adapa, the first civilised man.
If one considers the cultural differences between those times and today,
the one striking difference is that promiscuity among the gods was almost
a part of their expected behaviour. Is it possible that the male human
species inherited those urges from the Anunnaki? We certainly inherited
most of their other characteristics, except the ones they specifically
erased from our DNA. There was however a strange ironic reason for high
levels of promiscuity in those ancient times. There had to be large
numbers of half-siblings who could procreate to keep the genetic poolstrong and healthy as the species was rapidly growing in numbers. So,
without even realising it, humans were imitating their maker gods in their
sexual habits.
A long period of human achievement and cultural foundation building
dawned. I will mention some of the characters who stood out in their
prominence or achievements. Malalu, meaning ‘He Who Plays’, was the
son of Kunin and Mualit, his half-sister, and was known for singing and
performing music, so Ninurta made him many instruments which
included a harp. Their whole family line worked in the metal city of Bad-
Tibira.
Irid, which means ‘He of the Sweet Waters’ became the master well
builder and provider of water where the humans liked to congregate and
procreate. Ever wondered where the Greeks and Romans got their ideas of
‘baths’, and where the word ‘irrigate’ originates from? The Igigi from
Mars were coming to Earth more frequently and in larger numbers,
wanting to escape the harsh climate there, and to participate in the
seemingly enjoyable lifestyle of the earthlings. The Igigi males started to
take a fancy to the daughters of man and they began to desire them.
Marduk took a bright young man called Enkime – ‘Understanding the
Annals’ under his wing and taught him many things. He took him to the
moon, taught him everything his father Enki had taught him before, about
the stars and constellations and the circuits of the planets. Imagine
finding those footsteps on the moon? What will that do to our perception
of humanity? On their return he was stationed under Utu at Sippar, the
“Place of the Chariots” and was called the ‘Prince of Earthlings’. Enkime
was the first human who was taught the functions of priesthood. Some
time later Marduk returned to the heavens with Enkime and his son
Matushal. But this time Enkime did not return, he stayed in ‘the heavens’.
“In a celestial chariot heavenward they soared…To visit the Igigi on
Lahmu by Marduk they were taken…That in the heavens he stayed till the
end of his days.” It is not quite clear what exactly happened to this
character but it is written that the Igigi really took a liking to him. The
possibility exists that Enkime actually stayed on Mars as a kind of
pacifying force with the Igigi, who were growing restless. This would bevery ironic since here we have a mortal earthling, giving real Nibiruans
inspiration. Maybe he was truly worthy of the priestly status bestowed on
him. And maybe this is where he put it to very good use, because it would
take a while longer before the Igigi finally began to leave Mars in great
numbers, heading for Earth. This all happened in the 104th Shar. Which
was 374 400 years after arrival, 68,600 years ago.
Adapa, the first civilised human or Homo sapiens sapiens died in the
108th Shar, 55,000 BC. He lived for 14 Shar, which would have made him
about 48,600 years old! This is clear evidence that the Anunnaki must
have performed additional genetic manipulation on humans as time went
by to reduce their ageing ability and thereby reducing their numbers as
well. This was however not enough to slow the rapid birth rate of the
slave species. As the numbers of mankind kept growing and beautiful
daughters were born to them, Marduk fell in love with an earthling
female. He would be the first Anunnaki to espouse an earthling and this
would clearly have some repercussions. During their controversial
debates, we are reminded about Humankind's mortality and the 'image' of
their maker. Marduk also reminds his father about the mess they had
made by creating a civilised species which is as advanced in their
thinking as the Anunnaki, the only difference being their longevity. “Step
by step on this planet a primitive being, one like us to be, we have
created…In our image and in our likeness civilised earthling is, except
for the long life, he is we.” This was Marduk's substantiation for wanting
to espouse an earthling female. His options were clearly presented to him
by Enki and Enlil. Marduk would forsake all his princely rights on Nibiru
and never be able to return there with his spouse. Even Anu was involved
in this weighty affair. “Marduk marry can… but on Nibiru a prince he
shall no longer be.” It was this kind of action by his elders, which pushed
the young ambitious Marduk even further towards rejecting the whole
system and eventually rising against all of the Anunnaki when he
proclaimed himself ‘god above all’.
And so after their wedding, Marduk and his bride Sarpanit were sent
away to a land of their own. “Adomain of their own, away from the Edin,in another land...” did Enlil and Enki say. We also get a pretty good idea
to which part of the world Marduk was restricted. “A domain above the
Abzu, in the land that the Upper Sea reaches, one that by waters from the
Edin is separated, that by ships can be reached.” This was the land of
Egypt they were talking about. The land which Marduk would rule as the
god Ra, in years to come? Unbeknown to the senior brothers Enlil and
Enki, the Igigi from Mars used the wedding ceremony as an excuse to
come to Earth. However, they had a much more cunning reason for
coming. Let's face it, their life on a lonely tough planet like Mars was not
what they had hoped for when they left Nibiru. They also wanted the
seemingly lavish and fun-filled life surrounded by slaves which the
Anunnaki on Earth had. But their main attraction to Earth were the
extremely sexual and beautiful ‘daughters of man’. The following
episode is well documented in Genesis, once again, copied from much
earlier Sumerian tablets and misunderstood by scholars and modern day
theologians. The Igigi were saying: “What to Marduk permitted is from
us too should not be deprived.” The earthling females were called
‘Adapite Females’, after their original ancestor Adapa, the first Homo
sapiens sapiens, the son of Enki and an earthling of Adamu's ancestry.
The Igigi said: “Come let us choose wives from among the Adapite
Females, and children beget.” They took these females as hostages to the
space port and demanded that they be allowed the same privilege as
Marduk. He obviously agreed with them. “What I have done from them
cannot be deprived.” Once again we see the angry Enlil who was
extremely agitated by this. “Enlil was enraged without pacification.” We
can clearly sense the clandestine plot to control humans by force and
punishment. “By our own hands this planet with earthling multitudes
shall be overrun.” He would become the vengeful god of the Bible
carefully monitoring every step the humans made, while ensuring they do
not grow too wise or too strong to challenge him in any possible way. So
even after Enlil capitulated “…let the Igigi and their females from Earth
depart...” he immediately had to face another dilemma. Marduk informed
him that it had become impossible to live on Mars any more, the
conditions had become unbearable and they would have to abandon theirstation. “On Lahmu conditions unbearable have become, surviving is not
possible.”
The immigrants from Mars were secluded in and around the space port
in the cedar mountains, where they had originally staged their resistance
from. They had children who became known as ‘Children of the Rocket
Ships’ often referred to in books and Sumerian translations. Eventually
some of them joined Marduk in his new land, some went “…to the far
eastlands, lands of high mountains...” while others remained where they
were. It is absolutely clear from these descriptions that these were the
original Aryans who later settled all over Europe and invaded the Indus
Valley, laying the foundation for the Indo-European language base. They
were white, technologically advanced and possessed knowledge way
beyond ordinary humans. They would also be the original pharaohs of
Egypt under Marduk's rule. Marduk started to build a large and loyal
following of earthlings who followed him, obeyed him and worshipped
him. He was becoming a powerful force on Earth which began to worry
Enlil and Enki. We hear some more biblical words from Enlil as he
ponders what the future may hold. “The Earth by the earthlings inherited
shall be.” And so Enlil planned a resistance against any possible future
moves by Marduk. He sent his son Ninurta to find the offspring and clans
of Ka-in where they dwelled in the distant lands, and teach them
everything they needed to know about making tools, mining,
manufacturing, smelting, ship building, sailing, and fighting a war. “In a
new land a domain they established, a city with twin towers there they
built…A domain beyond the sea it was, the mountainland of the new
Bond Heaven-Earth it was not.” From these descriptions it sounds to me
undoubtedly like the early Andean settlement and civilisations of South
America in Peru and Bolivia near Lake Titicaca.
Back in Edin they appointed a human called Lu-mach, the son of
Matushal, to be the work master for the Anunnaki. He had a wife called
Batanash. “Of a beauty outstanding she was, by her beauty was Enki
charmed.” We see the highly sexual side of Enki's character resurface
once again, creating more controversy and introducing his gene pool into
the human species yet again. He seduced the beautiful Batanash who borea son whom they called Ziusudra, ‘He of Long Bright Life Days’. This
would be the human who survives the flood in an ‘ark’ and who was the
real original character that the Bible calls Noah. He was raised in
Shurubak, but the secret of his paternal line remained with Enki and
Batanash. He was born in the 110 th Shar, 396,000 years since arrival,
47,000 years BC which was right in the middle of the last Ice Age. For
those who believe that the Ice Age meant that the whole world was
covered in snow and ice, this was not the case. Scholars describe that
most of Canada, northern USA, northern Europe and northern Asia was
covered by ice and snow. But further south, the world was very habitable
with a very different climate to today. That is also why the Anunnaki
settled in Mesopotamia between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers when it
was very lush and green, and did not look anything like the desert it is
today. Antarctica was probably much more extended with thick ice
covering, which would be the main cause of the Great Flood in time to
come.
Just like Adapa, Enki's first human offspring, Ziusudra was also very
smart, showing great signs of intelligence and Enki adored the boy who
looked just like him. The description of the child gives us a good idea of
what Enki looked like. This is how the child Ziusudra is described.
“White as the snow his skin was… the colour of wool was his hair…like
the sky were his eyes, with a brilliance were his eyes shining.” From the
beginning he was treated with special care by both Ninmah and Enki. He
was taught 'priestly rites' and everything which Adapa knew before him.
We are also given a strong hint that the Anunnaki used a different
language or written script among themselves when we read “…to read the
writings of Adapa he him taught.” In this bit of information lies the
possible substantiation that the Indus script and the Balkan-Danube script
may be a language which the Anunnaki used, or a related script which the
early humans like Ziusudra and Adapa used long before the flood wiped
out most of the world. That would also explain why there is only a small
number of examples found in the world. The rest were carried away and
buried under mountains of sand and silt. But when the Sumerian tabletsrefer to the “Prior times” do they mean times before the flood? When
there was a different kind of order on Earth? When the language was
different, before the tower of Babel and before “man's language was
confused”? It certainly seems like it.
DIAGNOSES OF MEDICAL CONDITIONS
Old Babylonian on clay, Babylonia, circa 1900 BC in cuneiform
script. This clay tablet outlines a number of medical procedures by an
ancient physician. Medical texts of this category are well known from
Neo Babylonian literature, while from the tablets which are over 1000
years older, the Old Babylonian period, only a few survived. Many of
the Babylonian diagnoses and prognoses still hold true in modern
medicine.
But the times were not good on Earth, it seemed as if it was trapped in
a downward spiral both culturally and environmentally. The Igigi were
procreating with earthling females at a rapid rate which made Enlil
extremely unhappy. “In his eyes the Anunnaki mission to Earth had
become perverted.” Let's face it, this kind of situation was probably the
furthest from his mind when they arrived to extract gold from the ground.
What is also fascinating was the environmental effect on the rapidly
emerging new species. Here we have a new species which was suddenly
dropped into relatively alien conditions to them. They did not evolve into
their surroundings; their immune systems were not adjusted to the
microorganisms on Earth at that time, so we should not be surprised when
we read about the diseases which overcame humans. “In the days of
Ziusudra plagues and pestilence the Earth afflicted…Aches, dizziness,
chills, fevers the earthlings overwhelmed.”
But Ninmah, the smart sister of the mighty brothers, was a true healer.“Let us the earthlings curing teach, how themselves to remedy to learn.”
Enlil would have none of it. He was not going to do anything to help the
new species survive and flourish. “Let the earthlings by hunger and
pestilence perish.” In his mind their stay on Earth was nearing the end
and he would rather wipe out all life before they departed for Nibiru. His
‘vengeful god’ personality was clearly exposed. The land suffered too,
nothing grew and winds, heat and drought haunted them. Nibiru was
nearing its path close to the sun and strange things were happening to
planet Earth. Tremors and quakes became regular events and Enlil
conferred with Anu on Nibiru about the strange activities. They set up
monitoring devices in the Abzu to observe the south pole. “Odd
rumblings in the Whiteland's snow were recorded…The snow-ice that the
Whiteland covers to sliding has taken.” This is the first real evidence of
the ending of the Ice Age, clearly captured in clay tablets. How could a
scribe 4 500 years ago have known anything about the events which
preceded the flood, unless he was told by someone who was there? The
detail in his text is too specific to have been conveyed orally over
thousands of years. It became clear that when Nibiru came around the
sun, it was going to cause havoc with Earth's gravity and have a
devastating effect on the polar regions where the ice was already melting.
“The next time Nibiru the Sun shall be nearing, Earth to Nibiru's netforce
exposed shall be.” Those are highly insightful words by the Anunnaki on
Nibiru, warning Enlil about a severe calamity awaiting the Earth.
The Anunnaki started preparing for evacuation. They ceased all the
smelting “…all the gold to Nibiru was lofted…for evacuation ready, a
fleet of fast celestial chariots to Earth returned.” Enlil called an urgent
meeting of all the Igigi and Anunnaki commanders and revealed the
“impending calamity” to them. “To a bitter end Earth mission has come.”
He made it clear that those who wanted to leave Earth had to do so
without their earthling spouses. This was the moment Enlil had secretly
been waiting for, to destroy the hordes of earthlings who have taken over
the world by their sheer numbers. Those among the Anunnaki and Igigi
who chose to stay, were told to move to higher grounds and wait for the
calamity to pass. The other Anunnaki who did not want to return toNibiru would wait for the events to play themselves out in their “Boats of
Heaven” at the edge of Earth’s atmosphere. Then came the critical
moment when the true human character of many Anunnaki children born
on Earth suddenly emerged. Marduk and all the other sons of Enki chose
to stay behind. So did Enlil's sons. This was a really emotional time for
the sensitive Ninmah; they all looked at her to hear her decision. “With
pride her choice to stay she declared… my lifework is here… The
earthlings my created I shall not abandon.”
Then Enlil revealed his master plan for the human race. “Let the
earthlings for the abominations perish.” We can clearly hear the tone of
the ‘god of vengeance’ whose voice we would constantly hear in the
Bible. But Enki disagreed very strongly with his brother. After all it was
he who created the humans in the first place, and he who had fathered the
next species of civilised humans. “A wonderous Being by us was created,
by us saved it must be.” A fierce argument erupted between the brothers,
where Enlil accused Enki of playing GOD. “The powers of the ‘Creator of
All’ into your hands you have taken”, blaming Enki for all the
abomination caused by the humans.
As the commander of Earth, Enlil made the final call, and instructed all
those present to take an oath, which would cause the destruction of
Humankind. “Now that a calamity by a destiny unknown has been
ordained, let what must happen, happen.” Everyone pledged their oath
except Enki, who stormed out of the assembly. “On Enlil alone let the
responsibility forever rest.” As part of the evacuation activities, Enlil
took the ME Tablets of Destinies to Sippar, the place of the “Celestial
Chariots” and buried them safely in a protective chamber. So what were
they all waiting for? What kind of calamity did they expect? A great
flood of water, with a wave so high that it would devastate the entire
planet. “When the avalanche of waters sweeps over the lands… In one
sudden swoop to an extinction shall be doomed.” And so the preparations
came to an end and they waited for the disaster to strike. This is the kind
of advanced warning the people of Indonesia, Thailand, Sri Lanka, India
and Ethiopia wish they’d had before the Tsunami devastated their lives.
But the defiant Enki and his sister Ninmah went to the Abzu and theycollected all necessary specimens which would allow them to recombine
all the life forms they had created on Earth. “Male and female essence
and life eggs they collected… For safekeeping while in Earth circuit to be
taken.”
“In Sippar the Anunnaki gathered, the day of the deluge they awaited.”
Enki was not done yet. After all, his flesh and blood, Ziusudra, was to be
left behind to perish in the flood. This is the original story of the flood
and how humans survived. Unlike the more naïve and simplified Biblical
version of Noah, the Sumerian tablets tell us in great detail to what length
Enki went to help Ziusudra; how he guided him with precise plans to
build the 'boat'; how to seal it with pitch and exactly what he should take
into it. “The boat be one that can turn and tumble, the watery avalanche to
survive…into it your family and kinfolk gather…water for drinking heap
up…household animals also bring.” Although Enki was defiant against
Enlil, he did not want to blatantly disregard the oath they had taken.
Therefore he conveyed all this information to Ziusudra from behind a
reed hut wall, not to expose his face. His rather childish but effective
argument was that he did not speak to Ziusudra, he spoke to a wall. “An
overwhelming deluge coming from the south, lands and life shall
devastate…Your boat from its moorings it shall lift…the boat it shall
turn and tumble…By you shall the civilised seed of man survive.” The
differences between this version and the Biblical story lies not only in its
practical content, but the fact that Ziusudra took not only his immediate
and extended family into the boat, but also other friends. The Biblical
Noah's seed would simply have died out within a few generations due to
inbreeding. The part where Noah has to take all the animals two by two
into the ark has always troubled me for reasons of improbability. But the
story has in fact a very different origin, one which makes more sense, and
is achievable. Remember that Enki and Ninmah collected all the essence
of humans and creatures in the wilds? Well, they carefully stored this
“essence” which must have been DNA, sperm and ova in appropriate
containers for preservation. The tablets are very clear on this. A few days
before the flood, Ningal delivered a box to Ziusudra in the boat. “The life
essence and life eggs of living creatures it contains, by the lord Enki andNinmah collected… From the wrath of Enlil to be hidden, to life
resurrected if Earth be willing.” Those are chilling words which would be
repeated many times by the heroes of the Bible thousands of years later.
The wrath of Enlil became the ‘wrath of god’ which has kept humanity
fearful and obedient until today.
And so the flood arrived as expected. It came in the 120th Shar,
432,000 years after arrival, about 11,000 BC which is exactly when
modern scholars claim the flood destroyed the world. It is also important
to note that at that stage Ziusudra was already 10 Shars old, which made
him 36,000 Earth years. It is now absolutely clear that the flood was not
caused by GOD in a moment of anger with humanity, but that it was
actually as a result of a cosmic event when the giant planet of the
Anunnaki came closer to Earth than it normally did, in its 3600-year
orbit. It was indeed a natural ‘calamity’ which was abused by the
Anunnaki to destroy their troublesome creation; their slave species called
man.
Nibiru came into close proximity of Earth, causing havoc with gravity
and seismic activity. It must have been very testing times for the fragile
planet. The tablets tell us clearly that “For days before the Day of the
Deluge the earth was rumbling, groan as with pain it did.” The time had
come for the Anunnaki to depart. “Crouched in their boats of heaven, the
Anunnaki heavenward were lofted.” We get a very clear picture of the
exact events, not because of someone's vivid imagination, but because the
Anunnaki were actually observing the flood from their spaceships in
orbit. The descriptions are much too detailed and descriptive for someone
from a primitive age to have imagined it.
“The Earth began to shake, by a netforce before unknown it was
agitated…In the Whiteland at Earth's bottom, the Earth's foundations
were shaking…Then with a roar to a thousand thunders equal, off its
foundations the icesheet slipped…By Nibiru's unseen netforce into the
south sea crashing…One sheet of ice into another icesheet was
smashing…The Whiteland's surface like a broken eggshell was
crumbling…Tidal waves arose, the very skies was the wall of waterreaching…Northward was the wall of water onrushing…The Abzu land it
was reaching…Towards the settled land it travelled…The Edin it
overwhelmed.”
We all know the kind of devastation a small Tsunami can bring, so just
imagine a tidal wave several hundred metres high moving northward
from Antarctica at 500 km per hour, like a giant circle around the world,
destroying all the lands lower than 2,000 metres above sea level. We get
another bird's eye view from the Anunnaki in their orbit above the Earth.
“Where there were dry lands, now was a sea of water…Where mountains
once to heaven their peaks raised, their tops now like islands were in the
waters.” We also get a good glimpse of Ninmah's sensitive side as the
'matriarch' of Humankind, who was very sad by what she witnessed from
up there. “My created like drowned dragonflies in a pond the waters fill,
all life by the rolling sea wave away was taken.”
I take it that we all know how the flood story ends, and yes you are
right, the boat did settle on the twin peaks of a mountain called Arata,
known to most as Ararat, which the tablets call “Mount of Salvation”.
The first thing Ziusudra did when he emerged from the boat, was to
praise the lord Enki for saving them. They built an altar, lit a fire and
gave thanks with a lamb sacrifice, something which he was taught in his
initiation into the priesthood. The floating spaceships in orbit could not
have been very comfortable, crammed with too many Anunnaki, keen to
get back to solid ground. It therefore was not long after things subsided
that Enlil and Enki landed to assess the damage. “The situation to review,
what to be done to determine.” At first the brothers were smiling and
embracing but “…when Enlil the survivors saw… his fury no bounds
had.” And once again we get a glimpse of the ‘god of vengeance’ who
would rule and control Humankind with oppression and violence for
thousands of years. In a rage of fury Enlil attacked Enki. “Every earthling
had to perish” he said. But Enki answered him by explaining the truth
about Ziusudra. “He is no mere mortal my son he is.” After some
deliberation and argument, Enlil was persuaded that it was the will of the
Creator of All which saved the humans. And before the so-called Olden
Times came to an end, we are confronted by several more statementswhich were repeated in the Bible many years later. Ninmah, who loved
her human creation whom she perfected with Enki, took an oath declaring
that “the annihilation of mankind shall never be repeated” and Enlil told
Ziusudra to “be fruitful and multiply.”
You can imagine what kind of sedimentation resulted from a flood of
this size. It took many years for the waters to subside, only to expose the
valleys filled with mud and silt. Everything in the Abzu and the Edin was
buried under mud. All the cities in the whole of Mesopotamia were gone,
buried under mud and silt. But the great stone platform, their landing
place in the Cedar Mountains was still there and could be used, mainly
because it was positioned much higher than all their other settlements.
Some scholars like Zecharia Sitchin believe this to be the ancient stone
platform of Baalbek in northeast Lebanon. When you view the giant
megaliths, placed together to form a perfectly flat platform which
stretches around 90,000 square metres, you begin to wonder why
prehistoric humans on Earth needed to build such a structure. The rocks
weigh between 200 and 1,200 tons each. Today, there are only a handful
of giant-sized cranes that could pick such stones up. They are perfectly
cut out and shaped with smooth sides to fit into each other almost like
Lego blocks at the edges. So it would make sense that this kind of
platform did not get washed away, due to its sheer size and also its
altitude. But what it did, was give the Anunnaki the crucial idea of how to
deal with possible disasters in future. And what kind of structures could
possibly withstand a similar disaster, while serving as an important
beacon in guiding the Anunnaki pilots when coming in from space. You
guessed right… the pyramids of Giza. Imagine having to land on a new
planet for the first time...would you not prefer a clear beacon which
guides you directly to the landing spot?
PYRAMIDS FROM SPACEA view of the pyramids from space. They not only served as
landmarks, but the Great Pyramid also housed the transmitter
beacon which would guide the incoming pilots and astronauts. These
giant structures were built after the flood, when the Anunnaki saw
how resistant the stone structure at Baalbek was to the flood waters.
Egypt and the Red Sea was a visible landmark from high above the
Earth.
I would, and clearly the Anunnaki did too. And that is where the pyramids
come into the picture a little later.
The devastation was not only restricted to Earth, the Igigi arrived from
Mars saying that their planet had also been devastated. “Lahmu by the
passage of Nibiru was devastated… Its atmosphere was sucked out, its
waters thereafter evaporated… A place of dust storms it is.” They
realised that survival was now their main concern. They retrieved the ME
from the Creation Chamber which they buried next to the launch site. It is
fascinating that even the material which was used for the chamber is
mentioned. It was diorite, the hardest stone known to man, harder than
iron. “The diorite chests with seals were fastened.” They retrieved a
whole variety of items including the seeds they brought from Nibiru,
which enabled them to start planting crops again. But while the survivors
on Earth were getting on with rebuilding their lives, the word from Nibiru
was not so reassuring. The gravitational activity between the other
planets and Nibiru had also effected them. “The shield of gold dust was
torn, the atmosphere was dwindling again.” Suddenly the scramble forgold became critical. Just when they were ready to pack up and go home,
the urgency had returned. But this time there were no more workers in the
Abzu, they were all killed by the water, and even the Anunnaki were few
in numbers as most of them returned to Nibiru. By fate or by destiny
which could have only been preordained by the Creator of All, “…on
Earth and on Nibiru there was desperation.”
The task of mining gold from ore was impossible with the few numbers
of people left behind. They surveyed the world again and Ninurta
returned with good news from distant lands beyond the ocean. The
mountains had been eroded by the flood, exposing rich sediments of gold
which were oozing out in pure nuggets. These were the valleys around
lake Titicaca on the border of Bolivia and Peru, and the beginning of the
ancient Inca civilisation before the Europeans came to plunder it. “…
Nuggets large and small to the rivers below fell down, without mining
can the gold be hauled.” Enlil and Enki were astounded. “Gold, pure gold,
refining and smelting not required, all about was lying.”
And so began the South American prehistoric gold rush. But they
needed to create a landing site nearby, from where to take the gold to
Nibiru. And so we uncover the practical origins of the Nazca plain. Much
has been written and speculated about the so-called Nazca lines. They
have certainly challenged the best archaeologists for centuries. The
Sumerian clay tablets provide the answers once more. For all those who
have wondered and marvelled at the strange markings and spectacles on
the flat hard desert-like ground at Nazca in Peru, the answers are crystal
clear in cuneiform text. “Now let us a new place to celestial chariots
establish, therefrom the gold to Nibiru send…For a new plain whose soil
has dried and hardened they searched…In a desolate peninsula such a
plain they found…Flat as a lake it was, by white mountains it was
surrounded.” This fits the exact description of the desolate peninsula of
Nazca which is surrounded by the Andes mountain range which would
have had “ white” snow on their peaks.X MARKS THE SPOT
The symbol of the cross is well documented in ancient civilisations.
Could it be that the Anunnaki used this symbol on the Nazca plain to
indicate their landing spot to incoming craft?
As seen in this satellite picture this approach does the job quite
superbly.
Ninurta had been living there before the flood and he knew where to
locate the descendants of Ka-in. The locals who survived the flood knew
Ninurta and revered him as their protector god. They could be used to
gather the gold and other metals, they knew the art of smelting and
handling of metals. Ninurta explained to Enlil and Enki “As the protector
of their forefathers they me recall…The great protector they call me.” At
this stage even Enlil who had hoped for the complete destruction of all
humans was pleased to find the survivors. The gods’ future was suddenly
in the hands of the humans. While the collection of gold began to swing
into action in South America, the Anunnaki were not simply going to
abandon their original settlements in Mesopotamia. For those who have
spoken about the pyramids of Giza being built as a mirror image of
Orion's Belt, there is much vindication in the tablets. The Anunnaki
decided to build a new landing site, “…a new place of the celestial
chariots.” The tablets further tell us that in the peninsula they chose, “…
the heavenly ways of Anu and Enlil on Earth were reflected… Let the
new place of chariots precisely on that boundary be reflected… Let the
heart of the plain the heavens reflect.” Enlil did the surveying from a skyship, but it was the talented Ningishzidda who once more showed off his
great architectural skills. That is why the latter civilisation of Egypt
would come to call him Thoth or Tehuti, ‘the divine measurer’ and the
god of science and knowledge. Ningishzidda designed, planned and
executed the building of the three pyramids of Giza.
WAY OF GOD ENLIL - ANCIENT PLANISPHERE
(FLAT CIRCULAR MAP)
When this disk was first discovered in the Royal Library at Nineveh it
was thought to be linked to ancient witchcraft. It is an Assyrian copy
of a Sumerian original. An ancient astronomical map divided into 8
segments, showing geometric shapes, unseen on any other ancient
artefact and drawn with precision. It includes a host of astronomical
content with a mathematical curve previously assumed not to have
been known in ancient times, also introducing the 360 degrees of a
circle. The direct translation of the Sumerian inscriptions on this disk
basically describe the “rout map” by which the “god Enlil went by the
planets”. It includes operating instructions with altitude and weather
pattern observations on various instruments. It also clearly shows the
dots representing planets and Earth as the 7th planet to which Enlil
would travel. The triangle on the left represents the far cosmos, while
the destination is the triangle on the right converging towards the
landing spot. Other translations are: “The ruler's domain on the
mountainous land” and “The way of god Enlil”. It also contains a
complex mathematical formula which has perplexed astronomers
ever since and as yet remains unexplained.Not as tombs as most people still erroneously claim, but as very
important landmarks, and indestructible beacons which made up part of
the landing grid of landmarks for pilots. “To demarcate the landing
corridor…To demarcate the landing corridor's boundary, ascent and
descent to secure.” And so the three great pyramids were planned and
measured as the beacons of their new future landing site. They witnessed
how solid the landing platform at Baalbek was, so they applied those
principles of using heavy rocks to build the new pyramid beacons in the
south as part of a giant grid of landmarks, which would guide the pilots
towards the landing site. The tablets describe how they chose the various
landmarks which included the old platform in the Cedar Mountains as
part of the directional grid. “Let the landing place in the Cedar Mountains
be a part of the facilities.” But why did they build the pyramids in that
specific place, while all the other fixed points they had chosen were
natural landmarks? This is why… “where the second set of twin peaks
was required, mountains there were none…only a water-clogged valley
from the ground protruded.” This is a perfect description of Giza all those
years ago, after the flood.
And so Ningishzidda came to the fore as he began to design the most
mysterious and controversial structure on Earth, the Great Pyramid of
Giza. “Artificial peaks thereon we can raise” he said to the others,
referring to Giza. But before he began the huge undertaking, he built a
smaller prototype to test some of his calculations. That was the smallest
of the three pyramids, or as we know it, the Pyramid of Menkaure. “On
the flatland, above the river's valley, Ningishzidda a scale model built…
The rising angles and four smooth sides with it he perfected.” Only after
he was satisfied with the model, he continued to build the big ones, and
we also learn how they managed to cut the stones so smoothly and
perfectly, so quickly and seemingly with ease. “Next to it a larger peak he
placed, its sides to Earth's four corners he set…By the Anunnaki with
their tools of power, were its stones cut and erected.” The next one to be
built was the Pyramid of Khafre, as outlined in Sumerian texts. The
reason we know this, is because the first two pyramids do not have a
major network of passages and chambers, which is exactly the way theyare described. “Next to it a larger peak he placed, its sides to Earth's four
corners he placed.” Only once the second one was completed, he took on
the task of constructing the Great Pyramid, with all its secret passages
which all had a specific purpose. This purpose was most certainly not to
serve as a tomb for some ‘earthling pharaoh’ thousands of years later.
“Beside it, in precise location, the peak that was its twin he placed…
With galleries and chambers for pulsating crystals he designed it.” There
we have it, written in perfect clay, the pyramids were to be landmarks and
beacons which transmitted signals and light to guide incoming pilots and
astronauts. A large number of scholars have shown beyond doubt that
none of the pyramids of the 3rd and 4th dynasty in Egypt have ever
produced any evidence of burials, bodies, sarcophagi or even inscriptions
to that effect. There is no evidence whatsoever that they were built as
tombs. This popular myth was created many years later when modern
archaeologists began to fill the mesmerised world with fantastic stories
created by their imagination only. Remember, that unlike the tombs of
the Valley of the Kings, the Great Pyramids of Giza do not have any
inscriptions at all, anywhere, which refer to the burial of a king. The only
inscription of king Khufu in the Great Pyramid is on a rock in one of the
smaller spaces above the King's Chamber. This is highly suspicious and
points to being a much later addition to the structure.
But the references to the pyramids do not end there. They called it
Ekur, ‘House Which Like a Mountain Is’. They placed what they called
the Nibiru Crystals in the chambers of the pyramid and “Enlil by his own
hand the Nibiru crystals activated… the eerie lights began to flicker, an
enchanting hum the stillness broke… Outside the capstone, all at once
was shining.” This was a great achievement for them, most likely
inspired by the resilience of the landing site which was not destroyed in
the flood. They had built a landmark that would withstand floods and
other kinds of catastrophes, except the constant onslaught of future
human plunderers. The Anunnaki assembled to witness the spectacle and
Ninmah even wrote and recited a poem.
“House that is like mountain with pointed peakFor Heaven-Earth it is equipped, the handiwork of the Anunnaki it is
House bright and dark, house of heaven and Earth
For the celestial boats it was put together, by the Anunnaki built
House whose interior with a reddish light of heaven glows
Apulsating beam that far and high reaches it emits
Lofty mountain of mountains, great and lofty fashioned
Beyond the understanding of Earthlings it is
House of equipment, lofty house of eternity…”
The poem goes on praising the structure and its maker. To honour the
builder, they agreed to build a monument nearby, with the face of the
builder and the body of a lion, which symbolized the ‘age’during which it
was built. “Let us beside the twin peaks a monument create, the Age of
the Lion it announce… The face of Ningishzidda, the peak's designer, let
its face be… Towards the place of celestial chariots gaze.” The
speculations about the age and meaning of the Sphinx have been as rife as
the confusion around the pyramids. But as you can see from this excerpt,
the tablets make it very clear when and why the Sphinx was built. As
always, the answers seem to be much less complicated and more probable
than the theories by historians who make pronouncements based on
romantic assumptions. All those who argue against this information will
probably eventually find that all the clues will lead them back to this
conclusion. A number of researchers have already made such suggestions,
implying that the Sphinx must have been around in times when water
caused most of the erosion of the monument, and not wind as others
assumed. Graham Hancock goes into great detail in his book Fingerprints
of the Gods to explain the geological and erosion factors which led to the
Sphinx being in the state it is today. It was mainly water, then wind which
eroded it. This could only have happened thousands of years ago when
Giza had more rain and the flood waters could reach the Sphinx.
Therefore many scholars now believe the Sphinx to have been built
around 10,000 BC. This would corroborate the information we find in the
clay tablets.
But even while the building was in progress, Marduk started causingtrouble again, complaining that his younger brother Ningishzidda was
getting all the glory and that once again he had been passed by. A period
of heated debates followed during which all the Anunnaki children made
all kinds of claims to different lands, and demanded that they be given
more control over loyal earthlings and command of their own regions.
“By the clamour for domains Ninurta and his brother were also aroused…
Lands for themselves and devoted earthlings everyone was demanding.”
The wise and rational Ninmah came to the fore, playing the part of the
peacemaker. She made proposals which clearly prevented violent conflict
among the Anunnaki. “Let not the celebration a contest become, Ninmah
amidst the raised voices shouted… For peace to prevail, the habitable
lands between us should be apart set.” For her role as a wise and calming
sister, they decided to change her name on that day. Ninmah became
known as Ninharsag, ‘Mistress of the Mountainhead’. And so they
divided the lands between the siblings and their followers. Ninharsag was
given the “Land of the Missiles” or Tilmun, better known to modern
humans as the Sinai Peninsula, which was out of bounds to humans. This
land was declared as neutral territory under Ninharsag's control. “The
habitable lands to the east thereof for Enlil and his offspring we set
apart.” This was the whole of the Near East or ‘Olden Lands’ where the
Anunnaki settled at first, which included Mesopotamia, Akkad,
Babylonia, Assyria and Sumer. The “dark-hued” lands and the Abzu
(Africa) was given to Enki and his clan which included his earthling son
Ziusudra. Enki decided to appease his oldest son Marduk, who also
happened to be the regular instigator of trouble, so he gave him the “dark-
hued” lands which we know as Egypt. Under his hand we see the sudden
emergence of the new Egyptian civilisation of earthlings. But the old
days of the ‘primitive worker’ slaves were gone. Suddenly everyone
clamoured for the “civilised worker” to be their slaves and perform all
kinds of tasks.
One can clearly detect from the rather stressful and manic period in the
lives of the Anunnaki, that they were very preoccupied with their own
personal struggle, family quibbles and problems with the mission to
Earth. They didn't want to have to deal with additional complaints of thehumans who began to multiply again. But this time the humans were
mixing with the Anunnaki and Igigi on a regular basis, many of them
expecting to be granted the same treatment as the gods, as opposed to
being treated like the lesser human slave species. A long period of uneasy
stability followed while the gold supplies were being depleted and the
occasional violent confrontation between the Anunnaki youth erupted.
The tablets describe various battles in detail where fierce and
sophisticated weapons were used, which could not possibly have existed
in those days. Most of the conflict was regarding land, instigated by
Marduk and the Igigi who were making all kinds of new demands and
breaking rules at every opportunity. The way in which humans have
fought over land since then is another perfect example of the genetic hold
this Anunnaki DNA has had over us for thousands of years. The
incredible desire to conquer lands and invade new territory is so
distinctly visible in the behaviour of the young offspring which the older
and wiser Anunnaki produced on Earth. And so the incredible family
drama of the Anunnaki continued among the extended family and their
allies, while the humans became mere spectators on the sideline of this
global stage. It would not be long however, before Humankind began to
play out their own drama of cultures attacking and killing one another,
but not before they were elevated to a higher level of civilisation by their
makers. There is a certain irony in that statement which is indicative of
the fact that the level of civilisation had very little to do with the initial
behaviour of Humankind, but it was the guiding hand of violent, selfish
gods who manipulated humans to achieve their own objectives. The
Anunnaki saw us in the same light we see the many kinds of domesticated
dogs, which we breed for various purposes. We adore them, but they are
not quite equal to us, because they are animals. And so the ‘gods’
perceived the human creation to be part animal and disposable.
The unrest among the gods continued and grew to the point where the
Igigi invaded the “Place of the Chariots”. Marduk lost both his sons
which made him even more bitter, and all this instability in the Old Land
caused Enlil to be concerned about the safety of their space port. Thisprompted him to build a new space port: “Bond Heaven-Earth” facility in
Ninurta's lands beyond the sea, as was mentioned earlier. They built it
“...in the mountain lands beyond the oceans beside the great lake...”,
which was Lake Titicaca. “At the foot of the mountain where the gold
nuggets were scattered… facility in secret establish we must.” This is
when the Nazca plain was first utilised by the Anunnaki, as they
introduced advanced knowledge to the South American humans.
Dumuzi was Enki's youngest and most cherished son. He was described
as being sensitive and caring and artistic. At the unveiling of the Great
Pyramid, he met Inanna, who was Enlil's granddaughter, and they fell
hopelessly in love. Many ancient love songs and poems were written
about the couple, they were like the primordial Romeo and Juliet. They
became inseparable and Inanna was described as being “...beautiful
beyond description she was, in martial arts with Anunnaki heroes she
competed.” She was also known as Ishtar, Venus and by many other
names in all the cultures around the world. No matter what name they
gave her, she was everyone's “Goddess of Love”. Inanna had great
aspirations of peacemaking between nations and people, this was one of
her strongest characteristics. Dumuzi was given lands above the Abzu,
with buffalo in the reeds, with rivers and cattle. This must have been very
close to Marduk's Egypt, which the older brother did not take kindly and
became insanely jealous. His jealousy was not only because of the lands
which were given to Dumuzi, but Inanna's big plans for her beloved. She
wanted Dumuzi's name to rise above all Anunnaki, and this was
dangerous territory which had been claimed by Marduk many years ago.
He would not have his baby brother upset his master plan. So Marduk
devised a devious plan to entrap Dumuzi in a sexual act. He set up their
half-sister Geshtinanna to seduce Dumuzi with the promise that their
offspring will be the successor to the throne because of their line of seed.
She must have had some real powers of persuasion, or some sedatives, or
Dumuzi simply behaved like a highly sexed male, who could not refuse
the advances of a beautiful girl. But in the middle of the night Dumuzi
panicked and ran away, through a river and over rocks where he slipped,
fell and killed himself in a freak accident.Enki was devastated, displaying some very human emotions which we
have also inherited from his active gene pool. “So did Enki bewail and
lament… Why am I punished, why has fate against me turned… Enki rent
his clothes, on his forehead he put ashes.” This tearing of a piece of
clothing when mourning was adopted by the Jews in later years. The
growing conflict between siblings knew no end. Inanna's sister,
Ereshkigal must have been insanely jealous of Inanna's looks and her
future role in the hierarchy of the Anunnaki, because she not only refused
to help Inanna in her search for Dumuzi, but she accused her of plotting
something against Marduk, and she infected Inanna with some kind of
deadly disease or virus. “Let loose against her the sixty diseases.” This is
most certainly a part of the tablets which must have given rise to
elements of witchcraft in Africa and the witchdoctors who still practice
an ancient form of healing in Africa. Ereshkigal lived in the Abzu, where
she was known as the ‘Mistress of the Lower World’ which was southern
Africa. It was not only her skills with medicines and disease which
inspired many tales, but the mysterious things which Enki did in his quest
to find Inanna, must have also been the source of the many ancient
African traditions of strange creatures with awesome powers;
indestructible bodies; and not like humans in their ways. What Enki did
next in his quest to find Inanna, is still a mystery to most who have
studied the tablets. “From clay of the Abzu, Enki two emissaries
fashioned, beings without blood, by death rays unharmed.” He sent them
out to find Inanna. These must have been some awesome prehistoric
clones, because as much as I try, I cannot fathom what else the scribe
could have meant. They do however closely resemble the ‘mythological’
creatures called Erinyes or Furies, as described in Greek and Roman
myths and I suggest you have another look at chapter 14 for a quick
reminder. But they did what they were sent to do. They found “…the
lifeless body of Inanna… hanging from a stake… Upon the corpse the
clay emissaries a Pulser and an Emitter directed… The water of life on
her they sprinkled…In her mouth the plant of life they placed… Inanna
stirred, her eyes she opened, from the dead Inanna arose.” It is not clear
why certain Anunnaki were revived from the dead, while others were not.This had a devastating effect on relations between Enlil and Enki. The
Enlilites wanted Marduk dead, while Enki's clan argued that while
Marduk was involved in the incident, “it was not by Marduk's hand did
Dumuzi die.” Inanna was not going to take this lying down. In her mind,
Marduk was responsible for the death of her beloved Dumuzi, so she
launched an attack on Marduk with the intention to kill him. “By Inanna
was the warfare begun…Marduk to battle she challenged...Retribution for
her beloved's death she wanted.” Another fascinating glimpse into the
future behaviour of humans, challenging each other to battle and duels
and other forms of violent conflict. A very noble kind of gesture, by
which European noblemen would invite each other into the countryside,
put on very smart clothing and then try to kill each other in a duel. Once
again we read about fierce weapons which caused death and destruction
over a wide area as the two engaged in battle. There were many earthling
casualties, which must have remained in the tales told throughout the
ages, about the battle of the gods. We are very familiar with similar so-
called mythological stories from all cultures. The simple explanation for
such ancient tales are that there were many such conflicts between the
Anunnaki gods, which must have been witnessed by the earthlings in the
affected areas. Those were not daydreams or mythological hallucinations
of primitive people with an overactive mind, those were real events in
ancient times, before writing was bestowed on the earthlings, when they
still depended on oral stories being passed down between generations.
Marduk retreated north towards the new artificial mountains in Giza,
where he took refuge inside the chambers of the Great Pyramid they
called Ekur. “With weapons of brilliance… Inanna the hiding place
attacked… while Utu the Igigi and their hordes of earthlings beyond
Tilmun held off.” Remember that the Igigi were Marduk's followers. But
the pyramid demonstrated the purpose with which it was constructed, to
withstand any kind of disaster. Inanna's weapons the “stone structure
could not surmount, its smooth sides her weapons deflected.” We learn
two very important bits of information from these written lines. Firstly,
that the pyramid did have a smooth finish outside, covering the building
blocks; and secondly, the description of passages and chambers of thepyramid during the chase inside. The kind of detail in the description
would have only been known by the builders of the pyramid or those who
had the privilege of having been inside themselves. All the proof we need
to substantiate that the Anunnaki actually built the pyramids long before
the Pharaohs inherited them.
“Then Ninurta of the secret entrance learnt, the swivel stone on the
north side he found…Through a dark corridor Ninurta passed, the grand
gallery he reached…Its vault by the many-hued emissions of the crystals
like a rainbow was aglitter…Ninurta up the gallery kept going…Into the
upper chamber, the place of the Great Pulsating Stone, Marduk
retreated…At its entrance Marduk the sliding stone locks lowered, from
one and all admission they barred.” These detailed descriptions could not
possibly be coincidental or some ancient person’s imagination. And yet
there are those who claim this is all a myth?
Some decided to leave Marduk in there to die for his transgressions but
his family protested. The wise Ninharsag came to the rescue once more,
resolving the deadlock. Marduk would be rescued but certain conditions
had to be met. “The Igigi who Marduk follow, the landing place must
give up and abandon…To the land of no return must Marduk in exile go.”
Then the task was up to Ningishzidda, the architect, to get Marduk out of
the pyramid. “Adoorway in the stones they will cut… a twisted passage
they shall bore… At the vortex of the hollowing through the stones they
will break through…Up the grand gallery they will continue… The three
stone bars they will raise… Marduk's death prison they will reach.”
Those sound like words of someone who had a very good knowledge of
the inside of the pyramid. Not some kind of airy-fairy dreamer imagining
gods and myths because he was bored. But many historians will still want
to make you believe such nonsense. And so it was that Marduk was
rescued by Ninurta and brought out alive, although barely. “Carefully
through the twisting shaft they the lord lowered, to fresh air they him
brought.” Ninurta also examined all the hi-tech equipment inside. “Its
Gut Stone, that directions determined, Ninurta ordered to be taken out…
The twenty seven pairs of Nibiru crystals he examined… To remove the
whole ones… Others with his beam he pulverised… To replace theincapacitated beacon, a mount near the place of the celestial chariots was
chosen.” And so the function of the great pyramid was moved to a
mountain top and the empty chambers became the fascination of
archaeologists ever since. These latest developments required that control
over old lands were to be evaluated and lordship over new lands had to be
assigned. So Enlil and Enki divided the lands between their other sons
again. The most significant allocation was that of Egypt, which was now
given to Ningishzidda, while Marduk was exiled. Inanna demanded a land
of her own, and after much debating, she was given the land of the Indus
Valley.
That bit of information has fascinated me. The highly sexed goddess of
love who was crazy about poetry is given the Indus Valley region, where
by complete coincidence the highly sexual Indian cultures originate from,
including the Kama Sutra philosophy of sex. Another coincidence? The
sixty four arts of love-passion-pleasure also coincidentally originated in
India. There are many different versions of the arts which began in
Sanskrit and were later translated into other languages, like Tibetan and
Persian. Many of the original texts are missing and the only clue to their
existence is in other texts. Vatsyayana’s version of the Kama Sutra is a
well known translation which survived. Is it also coincidence that unlike
other religions, the ancient Vedic praises to the gods are in poetic form?
And it just so happens that the goddess of love was a big fan of poetry?
But the times on Earth had undergone great change. “The earthlings
have proliferated… Of civilised mankind by Ziusudra there were
descendants…With Anunnaki seed they were intermixed…Igigi who
intermarried roamed about…In the distant lands of Ka-in kinfolk
survived.” The numbers surviving pure Anunnaki were very small and
they had growing problems on many fronts. Conflict among themselves,
large numbers of humans making all kinds of demands, supply of food
was problematic, humans were getting out of control. The Anunnaki had
to come up with a master plan to take control of the situation, to ensure
that humans were kept in their place, stayed obedient and worshipped the
gods. “Few and lofty were the Anunnaki who from Nibiru had come…
Few were their perfect descendants.” But to devise a plan for the futurethey needed the wisdom and advice of Anu. “How over mankind lofty to
remain, how to make the many the few obey and serve.” And so it was
that “To come to Earth one more time Anu decided.” And so we read in
no uncertain terms that the gods wanted to remain ‘lofty’ over the
humans.
By now, enough time had passed for the flooded plains and valleys to
dry and become habitable again. Some of the ‘black-headed people’or
primitive workers in the south of the Abzu, who survived the flood, came
in search of food and probably to also get some guidance from their gods,
who lived in the north. The descendants of Ziusudra and his son Shem
started to come down from their primitive dwellings in the mountains to
resettle in the valleys and plains. They were among the few who were
well trained and skilled in the art of farming. The Anunnaki decided to
rebuild their original cities on Earth, where they originally stood, but
were now covered with soil from the flood. They also decided to use the
more civilised humans for providing food for the growing populations of
survivors on a much larger scale. This would however require the general
upliftment of the slave species. “Upon the newly dried soil, the Anunnaki
let them settle, food for all to provide… On top of the myriads of mud
and silt a new Eridu was marked out.” If you remember, Eridu was the
first city of Enki when he arrived on Earth, and now he built his new
home in the middle of the brand new Eridu, while Enlil built his new
home where the old Nibru-ki stood. It was a seven-stepped ziggurat
pyramid. “A stairway rising to the heaven, to the topmost platform led…
His tablets of destinies did Enlil there keep, with his weapons it was
protected.” It seems that Enlil was the one who always used weapons to
protect his dwellings, a habit which Marduk learnt very well in his
dictatorship over Egypt.
They built a brand new palace for Anu and Antu's (Anu’s wife) arrival
in the middle of the Edin, calling it Unug-ki, ‘Delightful Place’. We learn
about the ageing effect that living on Earth had on the Anunnaki when
Anu arrived. “At each other they looked, ageing to examine…Greater in
Shars were the parents, younger than the children they looked.” They
debated this for some time concerned about this strange phenomenon. ButAnu reassured them that those who returned to Nibiru were treated and
cured of this ageing problem. A number of banquets and astronomical
observations took place during which they awaited the rising of various
planets as night fell, including Nibiru. “From the topmost step…The red-
haloed Nibiru into view came…The heavenly planet of the lord Anu.” As
you know by now, this was not the first time that we read about the 'red
hued' planet of the Anunnaki.
The appearance of their planet made them go through another spell of
deeply philosophical deliberation about the past events on Earth, their
role in all of it, and “was the creation of the earthlings also destined?”
They came to the startling conclusion that “The will of the Creator of All
is clear to see… The Earth to earthlings belongs…To preserve and
advance them we were intended.” This is what Anu shared with his
extended family on Earth. And so by this newly found understanding of
their role in the greater scheme of things, they agreed to reorganise
humans and teach them much more about civilisation. “If that is our
mission here, let us accordingly act, so did Enki say.” It is important to
witness once again that it was Enki who led the drive to uplift and
educate humans, as he tried to do many times before. His brother and his
eldest son Marduk, would however follow a different path of educating
humans, introducing a long legacy of brutality and control over them. But
for now, they had to start from scratch again, establishing cities for
humans and “therein sacred precincts, abodes for the Anunnaki create.”
And so we learn about why the many temples to worship the many gods
were built in the ancient cities. We also learn that this was the true
beginning of kingship and priesthood in the world, as the Anunnaki chose
appropriate humans to perform those tasks once more. “Kingship as on
Nibiru on Earth to establish, crown and sceptre to a chosen man give.”
This answered many questions in my own mind. For I have always been
troubled by the complex and shady origins of kingship on Earth. I could
never be convinced by the popular theories surrounding the origins of
royalty and why it would have been necessary for kings or royalty to
suddenly emerge from a group of ancient, primitive cultures. Although
you will find many historians who spew forth many arguments whykingships were a natural progression in human social and structural
evolution. Their arguments continue to be highly speculative, based on
the popular views of the origins of Humankind, which have very little to
do with the truths revealed to us in the ancient clay tablets. The king,
newly appointed by the Anunnaki, would convey the word of the
Anunnaki to the people and enforce “work and dexterity” on them. This
was pretty much the early beginning of the Old Testament and introduced
the way in which the gods began to control humans.
The priests had an equally important role to fulfil from that point in
history. They were to be taught “secret knowledge”, to teach civilisation
to mankind and to serve the Anunnaki as lofty lords and worship them in
the temples. Such talk about secret knowledge is fascinating. It is
possible that it was this license to teach humans, which caused Enki to
continue his ‘secret society’movement which has been successfully
traced all the way back to Edin by William Bramley in his astonishing
book Gods of Eden? After all, he was the ‘serpent’ who constantly wanted
to uplift humanity!
To achieve all this growth and development on Earth, the Anunnaki
decided to establish four new regions which would be governed by
appointed gods. Three of these areas were set aside for humans and the
fourth for the Anunnaki, which was not accessible to humans. Enlil
received the old lands, as he pretty much did before, including the Edin
and all of Mesopotamia, or what became the Biblical regions in time to
come; Enki retained all of Africa and Inanna, Anu's beloved great
granddaughter was given the lands of the Indus Valley. The fourth region
was reserved for the Anunnaki, in the Sinai Peninsula, or the ‘Place of the
Chariots’ and declared out of bounds to humans.
Anu wanted to see his grandson Marduk, so the party departed for the
lands beyond the ocean. First they built a palace for Anu in the new
golden land which was South America. All the buildings were covered in
gold, even the statues and flowers in the gardens were made of gold,
displaying incredibly intricate workmanship like never seen before. This
sounds identical to the golden city described by Cortes when he first
discovered the immense wealth in the Americas and stumbled upon agolden city of exactly such description. Anu saw the abundance of gold in
this new land and how it was attained from the rivers near the lake in the
mountains. He was also shown how a new metal was created on Earth by
combining copper with tin. The result was a strong new metal which they
called Anak and we call bronze. Anu was obviously pleased with the
progress and realised that the time of the Anunnaki on Earth was coming
to a close. “There is gold here enough for many Shars to come...” he said
and called the lake Anak. If we scratch deeply enough we are likely to
find references to such a name in the ancient Inca traditions, or possibly
Peruvian and Bolivian cultures. What is revealed to us next is that
Marduk came from the north to see Anu, which makes it pretty obvious
that he must have been involved in the rise of the early Mexican
civilisations, which were slightly different from the rest and yet shared
many common signs of Anunnaki interventions, especially the ‘Flying
Serpent’ god. And if Enki was the flying serpent god, it would explain
why he frequented this part of the world – to visit his son Marduk. The
architectural styles and social building blocks are too similar to all the
others around the world, not to have been driven by the planned
‘civilisation drive’ of the Anunnaki at the time. Anu felt a great sense of
pity for his grandson Marduk, for the way in which his fate had separated
him from the other sons of the Anunnaki and caused him to become an
outcast. And so he pardoned and blessed Marduk, which was probably all
the license the young rebel needed to justify his actions of defiance in
time to come.
Anu was to depart and we are reintroduced to the new landing place
they had created on the Nazca plain. Anu gave his final instruction on
how to deal with earthlings. “From the golden place, high in the
mountain, all who had gathered to the plain below they went… There
stretching to the horizon, Ninurta a new place for the chariots had
prepared… Give mankind knowledge, up to a measure secrets of heaven
and earth them teach.” We have seen that the concept of time had a
totally different meaning to the Anunnaki and that a few Shar, or few
thousand years was not an unusual timeframe to deal with. It is however a
notion way outside of our human frame of reference. We can hardlycomprehend circumstances which prevailed 200 years ago, so how can we
possibly try to wrap our simple minds around epochs lasting 3 600 years?
But those are the realities throughout the ancient times on Earth which
led us to the point where we are today. This last interaction between Anu
and the leading Anunnaki on Earth was almost within our grasp of
comprehension because it must have taken place some 5000 BC, around
the time we see the real evidence of a true civilisation with the
knowledge of writing emerging on Earth. This fits in well with the final
instructions given by Anu to his commanders on Earth. “Laws of justice
and righteousness teach them, then depart and leave.” Those are crucial
words to ponder, as we ask ourselves, ‘where are the Anunnaki today’?
The answers may lie in that single statement. The Anunnaki finished their
golden explorations and departed, leaving humanity to their own device.
Or did they? There would still come a period of about 7,000 years,
bringing us to our present time, which was filled with confusion and
continued conflict, causing the virtual annihilation of the planet and
taking humanity through the very murky biblical times. This was the time
when the Anunnaki began to count their stay on Earth in orbits of Earth-
years and not orbits of Nibiru or Shars, as they had been doing upto that
point. “In the Age of the Bull, to Enlil dedicated, was the count of Earth
years begun.” (Bull 4380 BC -2220 BC)
Nevertheless, those words of Anu “Give mankind knowledge, up to a
measure secrets of heaven and earth them teach...” were very important in
the much greater scheme of things, reaching right into the 21st century.
The thousands of years which followed became more widely documented
and recorded in various forms and in different cultures where humans
were being uplifted and nurtured by the Anunnaki gods. Because the
period which followed has become known as the time when sudden
ancient civilisation emerged. We now know why and how it emerged,
under the watchful eye and guidance of the Anunnaki. But their internal
family problems only escalated from this point in time, leaving humans
as vulnerable bystanders in the great struggle for power among the
Anunnaki. Enlil would do his best to control his extended family onEarth, constantly having to deal with the human problem as a side issue.
Very soon the humans began to emulate their gods, initiating conflicts
and aggression against each other. But those human conflicts were often
driven by the gods of biblical times, as becomes very clear from the
many scriptures of the Old Testament. The god of vengeance would
become the omnipotent force which began to rule over humanity with an
iron fist. However, what we need to consider is, was there only one ‘god’
in the Old Testament who ruled over humans, or were there more than
one, leading to confusion among humans and even greater conflict
between the Anunnaki gods to take control of the world and its slave
species with it?
After Anu's final departure Marduk began to make a move to assert his
rightful control over the world, which was promised to him by Enki at the
very beginning of time on Earth. But as we have seen, through an
unforeseen set of circumstances the young Marduk was always somehow
left out of the distribution of power and responsibility. This is why he
finally snapped and decided to take what was ‘rightfully’ his. We should
therefore not be surprised to see the levels of uncertainty by Enlil and
Enki about how to deal with the problem. They both realised that Marduk
had a really legitimate case to make; his forceful methods however, were
not so convincing.
The period which followed was the miracle of civilisation. This was
the time when so-called primitive man stepped out of the caves and
started to display very high levels of intelligence, when the knowledge
and understanding of modern societies came to him virtually overnight.
The reason for that is simple and it had nothing to do with some
miraculous fast-track evolution or anything as dramatic as that. It was
simply that the Anunnaki had strict instructions from their leader Anu, to
do exactly that; train the humans and leave. And so it began. Humankind
everywhere was taught the basic skills of survival by their Anunnaki
gods. Remember that there were many gods who looked after the villages,
towns and cities. Those were the members of the extended Anunnaki
family who were assigned to look over humans and keep them under
control. These gods were like field soldiers in many cases, looking after adistant outpost. When the general or commander came to town, there
would normally be a celebration in the form of an offering and
worshipping in the temple. Every settlement had a temple specifically
designed for such purpose. We have already explored the lavish temples
which were erected for the patron god of each city, with its fresh water
and shady garden, a place to rest and a place where people could make
their offerings. There was also a strict menu of what each god preferred
to eat. Those menus would have to be prepared, sometimes several times
a day, as different gods had different taste preferences. The role of the
high priest was to ensure that the gods were looked after and in return the
priest would be given instructions to convey to his people. Avery simple
setup if you think of it. But somehow it was all twisted out of context
over the past few thousand years, spawning human-made religions which
became trapped between the needs of the gods and their control of the
people.
I must say that while I was reading all this information staring at me
from the pages of various books, I constantly had to stop and remind
myself that I was not reading a great novel, but I was actually reading the
actual words written by ancient Sumerian scribes carved into clay some
4,000 to 5,500 years ago. I would suggest you do the same. It is very
important to keep reminding oneself of this reality, because the content is
so fantastic that it begins to sound like a science fiction screenplay
conjured up by some Hollywood writer to attract mass appeal. Ask
yourself once more, what possible motive would a scribe who was
appointed by a king all those years ago have, to capture such content so
painstakingly in clay?
And so the civilisation of the humans began. “Where once cities of the
Anunnaki alone had stood, cities for both them and earthlings now arose.”
The humans were taught everything from making bricks, building,
architecture, schooling, reading, writing, calculating, laws of justice,
planting, harvesting, farming, finding water, using the wheel, riding of
chariots, and basically everything we know today, which we have
inherited from those early civilisations. There were a few well known
landmarks like the city of Lagash, where Ninurta kept his “BlackSkybird” and the city of Sippar from where Utu promulgated the laws of
justice in a place called “Ebabbar – Shining House.”
The time had come, to bestow kingship of sceptre and crown on
Humankind and so it was that the first human king was appointed in the
city of Kishi or Kish. He was called ‘Mighty Man’ by Ninurta. Kish
became known as ‘Sceptre City’. This title would be moved around from
city to city every few hundred years. During the rebuilding of the old
cities, “where because of silt and mud the olden plans could not be
followed, new sites were chosen.” The concerted effort to uplift the
humans paid off very quickly and the times on Earth were prosperous.
There was plenty of food for everyone for the first time in a long time,
industry blossomed and the manufacturing of wheeled wagons was
booming. Ninurta requested some of the ME from Enki for his tasks.
Once more we read about the distinction between those who were brought
up in Edin and those ‘black-headed people’ who arrived from the Abzu.
But the teaching was extended to everyone. It would be these ‘black-
headed people’ who would rise to become the great and powerful kings of
Nubia, in the Sudan, who took over Egypt in later years. “In Kishi were
the black-headed people, with numbers to calculate taught… Heavenly
Nisaba writing them taught…Heavanly Ninkashi beer making them
showed.” Ninurta was in charge of this land of Edin, they chanted praises
to him and his ‘Black Bird’and told tales of “how in faraway lands the
bison he subdued, how the white metal to mix with copper he found.” The
white metal was tin, at lake Titicaca.
Inanna also wanted to obtain some ME from Enki, so she orchestrated
a devious plan of seduction during which we learn more about her powers
as the goddess of love and sex. She caught Enki at home alone, inebriated
him with wine and seduced him with her semi-naked posing. It reads like
a script from a soft-porn movie. “With jewellery was Inanna bedecked,
by her thin dress her body she revealed…When she bent down, her vulva
by Enki was thoroughly admired… from the wine cups sweet wine they
drank, for beer drinking a competition they had.” Sounds pretty similar to
the kind of behaviour humans have been engaging in for thousands of
years and we can clearly see our genetic link to the Anunnaki. Duringtheir drinking games Inanna wanted to see some of the ME. Enki had no
reason to suspect anything so he allowed her to hold some of them as part
of their adult entertainment. He explained to her that “ninety four ME's
that for civilised kingdoms are needed.” Inevitably Enki fell asleep and
she escaped with her stolen ME to start her own empire in the land she
had been given. Enki's assistant Ismud chased her down, but she had
hidden them by then, claiming that Enki placed them in her hand. It
transpired that Enki admitted begrudgingly and he let the matter be.
When Enlil announced that the kingship would be moved from Kishi to
Inanna's abode of Unug-ki, Marduk was enraged. Once more he was
denied of being the commander of the planet that was promised to him.
“Enough has my humiliation been… Marduk fate in his own hands
grasped.” He decided to build a sacred city of his own in the place which
was at first reserved for Anu's visit. He called the Igigi and his followers
from the dispersed lands and planned to build a “sacred city” and “a place
for sky ships”. The city in question was Babylon.
And so, Marduk built a city which reached the sky. They made clay
'brick and burnt them by fire' to serve as stone, because there were no
stones in the area. “Therewith a tower whose head the heavens can reach
they were building.” We can immediately see the biblical parallel of the
Tower of Babel in this part of the texts. But Enlil was not impressed with
this at all. He realised that this was an attempt by Marduk to show his
power and influence, which had to be kept in check. And just as it says in
the Bible, “...God came down to destroy the tower and confuse their
language, because if they could achieve this, they would be able to do
anything.” The clay tablets tell it almost verbatim: “If this we allow to
happen, no other matter of mankind shall be unreached…This evil plan
must be stopped…From their skyships havoc upon the rising tower, fire
and brimstone they rained.” But this was not enough for Enlil, he wanted
Marduk far away from him and to confuse his earthling followers, so they
could not understand each other, just as it says in the Bible. “To scatter
abroad their leader and his followers… Henceforth their counsel to
confuse…Their language I shall confound, that they each other's speech
will not understand.” Those were very confusing words when seen in thelight of an ‘all-loving God’ who is supposed to want the best for his
creation and certainly not the kind of words we would expect from GOD.
But when seen in the true ancient perspective, it now makes complete
sense why ‘god’ would seem so angered by the building of the tower.
These tablets also educate us that Marduk was the original creator of the
city of Babylon. Just as with the construction of the pyramids, which we
still struggle to comprehend, the marvels of the Hanging Gardens of
Babylon must have been the work of an advanced being like Marduk, the
Anunnaki god. But with his expulsion from Babylon, Marduk set his
sights on a more exciting prospect, which would bring him loyalty and
notoriety, Egypt. This was 310 years since the new Earth count began
7400 BC. This would place the event at 7090 BC or possibly even 3490
BC if the later date for Earth-count years is accepted (3,600 years later).
The later date would fit the rise of the early Scorpion King and the
subsequent pharaohs in Egypt.
Sitchin gives us a very clear indication that Egypt had been ruled by
the Anunnaki gods for some 12,300 years, which basically started soon
after the flood ended and the Pyramids were constructed. We must
remember that Marduk was the god of Egypt before he made a play for
power in Babylon, but upon his return he found that his younger brother
Ningishzidda had changed everything. “Ningishzidda as its master he
there found…What Marduk had once planned and instructed, by
Ningishzidda was overturned.” One of the things Ningishzidda was
accused of, was sending Horon or Horus “...to a desert place depart, a
place that has no water.” This line is very important in helping us string
together the rule of the god Horus in southern Egypt, known as Upper
Egypt. It was predominantly a desert area and Horus was much more
worshiped there that in Lower Egypt. The quarrel between the brothers
lasted for 350 years, as long as the two Egypt parts were divided. Once
again this timeline seems to fit perfectly, because it is estimated that the
Scorpion King united Upper and Lower Egypt in about 3100 BC, which
saw the rise of the true Egyptian Empire.
After the intervention of Enki, the talented Ningishzidda was
convinced to depart for the “land beyond the oceans…With a band offollowers thereto he went.” We must recall that this was a talented
architect who designed the pyramids and the scientist who formulated the
human DNA. His symbol was similar to that of Enki, consisting of
entwined serpents representing life and creation, constantly referred to as
‘The Winged Serpent’. I mentioned before that we sometimes feel
uncertain whether it is Enki or Ningishzidda being referred to as the
'Winged Serpent' because their symbols were so very similar and even
their abilities and characters were very close. Based on the tablets
however, it was most likely Ningishzidda, who had such a huge influence
on the very early American cultures, teaching them most of what they
knew including the building of the incredible structures in that part of the
world. But there is a further interesting twist to this part of ancient
history. Prior to this, Ningishzidda lived in Africa and probably used
skilled African labourers who were trained in mining and building for his
projects there. They were most likely also the ones who were mainly
responsible for building the pyramids under his supervision. It therefore
makes perfect sense that the distinctly African features of the Olmecs
could have been the labour force of Ningishzidda when he first arrived in
the Americas. They were very simply his entourage of African builders
and miners. Furthermore, it would explain why the writing style of the
Olmecs in Mexico, resembles the writing styles of various African tribes.
ANCIENT MINERS
Olmec miner shown crouching in a confined space with some form of
head-gear and tools in both his hands. He is protected by his everpresent serpent deity. Were these Olmec miners brought from Africa
by the serpent god Enki to expand the search for gold in the
Americas? There are many depictions and carvings of miners in
similar conditions which have baffled historians for ages.
I have to remind you that Egypt was inhabited by humans and gods for
many thousands of years before the pharaohs made their appearance.
There is plenty of evidence of that in the Narmer Plate, which was found
and dated to around 4468 BC and depicts the unification of Egypt by the
Scorpion King Narmer. There are also the Egyptian sky charts which
point out celestial constellations of some 14,000 BC. In fact, it is
recorded so precisely that those specific charts can be traced to exactly
11:57 pm on the 3 rd of July 14,000 BC. Historians say that it is not clear
who was responsible for unifying Egypt, but the tablets tell us in no
uncertain terms that it was Marduk. What is very exciting to me
personally and I see it as a little victory over conservative historians, is
that the Scorpion King has finally been proven to have been a real
historic figure. For many years he was seen as another mythological god
who lived only in ancient people's minds. This kind of discovery will
hopefully lead the way in getting people to recognise that the other gods
of our past were also real live beings. For many years, Menes was
credited with being the first pharaonic king of Egypt. But now there is
lots of evidence that King Narmer was actually the mysterious Scorpion
King who predated Menes by more than 1,500 years, if not more. In the
years leading up to Menes, during the time of Narmer the Scorpion King,
there is a lot of reference to the god Nannar, who was Enlil's son and was
possibly active in Egypt before Marduk finally took control of it. Is it
possible that Narmer was Nannar's son? Who was responsible for
unifying Egypt? Or did he achieve this under the rule of Marduk? The
Scorpion King's images cover the ruins of a fully fledged city, which was
excavated at Hierakompolis dating back to 3500 BC. Furthermore, a dig
at Abydos delivered 160 small bone and ivory plates, the size of a large
stamp, which contain the oldest known versions of early hieroglyphic
text. Gunter Dryer, a German archaeologist believes that they were thepossessions of the Scorpion King, since they were found in his tomb.
Could this be another example of how the Anunnaki gods were slowly
introducing the earthlings to the art of writing? Because these finds are
now possibly the oldest examples of written text on Earth. It seems that
Marduk took over this part of the world around 3500 BC, which is also
probably the reason why we knew so little about Narmer The scorpion
King, because he did all the initial work for Marduk, before the Pharaonic
era was introduced. And besides, it is possible that Narmer was of Enlil's
clan and this would not have been pleasing to Marduk. All future
pharaohs would have to be related to Marduk and his Igigi or Neteru
(watchers) in some way. All this information would make Narmer well
over 1,500 years old by the time he was buried. Could that be possible?
Why not? Noah or Ziusudra was 36,000 years old according to the
Sumerians' count. But that was all on account of him being a human son
of Enki. There is therefore no reason to marvel at the age of King Narmer
if he was the son of Nannar, a full Anunnaki god. But he too would
eventually die as all human half-breeds did.
By the time Marduk took control of Egypt, he had the whole of the land
to himself. North and south were unified and he began building his
dynasty as the great god Ra, “The Bright One”. Enki was known as Ptah –
‘The Developer’ and Ningishzidda was Thoth or Tehuti – ‘The Divine
Measurer’. From the beginning, Marduk/Ra wanted to stamp a brand new
authority on this land of his. The first thing he did was to erase the face of
Ningishzidda off the Lion Sphinx statue. “To erase his memory, Ra on the
Stone Lion his image with that of his son Asar replaced.” But Marduk
went a lot further to differentiate his land from the others. He changed the
counting into tens and not by sixty; he divided the year into ten periods;
and “the watching of the moon by the watching of the Sun he replaced…
The two lands of the North and South into one Crown City he united.”
This ancient statement clearly suggests that it was Marduk after all, who
was behind the unification of Egypt, which means that Narmer was acting
on his instructions. I hope that this will finally put this part of Egyptian
history to rest. Probably not. It is painfully clear that Marduk was a very
talented and yet a highly frustrated individual who wanted to get his ownback for the years of being overlooked. He was going to do everything in
his power to prove his point and rise above the rest of the gods. He did
not waste any time before he introduced a new religion and instituted
Pharaonic reign to mark the beginning of his new breed of civilisation.
But his biggest mistake was to declare himself as ‘god above the rest’.
The Pharaohs had to be half-god, half-earthling and were chosen mostly
from the group of Anunnaki gods known as ‘Neteru’or ‘The
Watchers’whose job it was to look after the earthlings, but it was actually
more like ‘spying’ on the humans than anything else. The Neteru could
very well be the so-called angels who mysteriously made their
appearance to humans when they least expected them. These were after
all the early biblical times and the occurrence of angels would become
almost a daily affair. Suddenly the mystery of the ever-present angels
does not seem so mysterious any more and there seems to be a plausible
reason for their presence in the tightly controlled human society.
But the new ‘lofty royalty’ created an immediate class structure and
allowed the kings to behave dismissively towards their followers. After
all they were ‘half-god’. It also explains why the kings were so obsessed
with their gods, because deep inside they aspired to be like them; fully
fledged immortal beings, able to travel to heaven. According to Sumerian
scripts the first king to be appointed by Ra was Mena, known as Menes to
historians. At this point we reach a crucial stage in our philosophical
debate. Because suddenly, prehistoric myth, meets recognisable historic
fact. Is it not incredibly arrogant of our conceited civilisation in the 21st
century, that we choose which parts of history we believe and which parts
we deem as implausible? For no other reason than we don't understand it,
or even worse, we simply don't believe it.
Enki was pleased that his son Marduk was making such good progress
in his region, so he gave him all kinds of ME, to help him with the
process. All except the knowledge to revive the dead. “Then all manner of
knowledge, except that of the dead reviving, to Ra he gave.” This would
prove to be a major gripe with Marduk, who would do anything to gain
that knowledge. We read how they controlled the flow of the Nile (Hapi)to benefit their farming and how “...abundance in the fertile soil quickly
came, man and cattle proliferated.”
Ninharsag named a constellation in Inanna's honour, to share with her
brother Utu, it would become known as the Age of Gemini. But the lands
given to Inanna, the third region, was not doing so well. “Far away in the
eastern lands, beyond seven mountain ranges, was the Third Region...
Zamush, Land of Sixty Precious Stones, was its highland realm called.”
This was obviously the Indus Valley region where Inanna's personality
and sexuality rubbed off on the humans. She was after all the goddess of
love and sensuality. We read about twin cities which were erected by her
and used for food storage, among other things. Those must have been the
cities of Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro. They were both built from the same
bricks and in the same style and are the same age. According to the
Sumerian tablets they were built 860 years after the start of the Earth year
count. This could mean either 2940 BC or 6540 BC depending on where
we take the beginning of Earth time. Either 7400 BC or 3800 BC. This
would have been either 1 Shar or 2 Shar after the last visit of Anu. The
very curious link to corroborate these events is the mysterious Indus
Script. The tablets inform us that Inanna introduced a new language and a
new way of writing. The Indus Script has puzzled scholars for many years
and to date is still not deciphered. This must have been the new language
introduced by Inanna, the ‘goddess of love’ and the first officially
appointed ruler of the Indus Valley region. The way in which Indian
culture utilises precious stones in their customs, clothing and jewellery,
also indicates that the Indus Valley was indeed the ‘Land of Sixty
Precious Stones’ and the land of Inanna.
The ME which Inanna requested were lost on the way to her in a
bizarre set of interceptions by her opponents; misunderstanding of their
new respective languages, and deaths of the carriers. Ultimately the result
was that the third region of the Indus Valley did not develop as well as
the other regions. “In the Third region, civilised mankind did not fully
blossom.”
This brought the period of growing instability among the Anunnaki and
the beginning of the end. The growing power quest by Marduk/Ra inEgypt and the resistance of the others began to cause skirmishes among
their human followers. Many of the lesser gods were being worshipped in
temples and sacred precincts and the first brothel was established by none
other than Inanna. “House for nighttime pleasure she established.”
Inanna's mourning for Dumuzi seemed to reappear in moments of
possible insanity. She began to imagine that a half-god earthling by the
name of Banda was her beloved Dumuzi. It is possible that her subtle
levels of instability caused Inanna to initiate the ‘catastrophe’ in time to
come. But Banda married Inanna, the pure offspring from Enlil and the
couple had a son called Gilgamesh who was two thirds god. Gilgamesh is
recognised as a historic king, once again crossing the line between fact
and fiction. As time went by, he realised that he had a strong divine DNA
and he began to lust for the same privileges which were reserved for
Anunnaki only. Like most humans today, he was especially taunted by the
idea of immortality. One of the most famous of all Sumerian legends is
the “Epic of Gilgamesh” in which he ventures into the lands of the
Tilmun, the space port where the spaceships and other secret Anunnaki
items were kept, in search of immortality. His mother Ninsun pleaded
constantly with her great uncle Utu, to guide Gilgamesh to Tilmun.
“Endlessly Ninsun to Utu appealed… Let Gilgamesh to the landing place
go.” The journey is written in great detail on a number of tablets and has
become one of the most studied ancient bodies of written word. The
argument still continues however, whether it was fictional or historical
because there are historians who refuse to accept this epic tale as part of
history, while they accept many of the other ancient writings. Shame on
them.
The epic tale tells us that to reach his destination Gilgamesh has to get
past a number of precautionary measures which defy ancient logic, but
his uncle Utu agreed to assist him with the aid of oracles. Oracles were
also referred to as ‘talking stones’ in those times. Often a priest would
consult an ‘oracle’ for advice from his god. The oracle would talk back to
the priest advising him what to do. So when we read that Utu used oracles
to help Gilgamesh reach the inner sanctum of the space port, it could be
that these were strategically placed type of 'sensor devices' or likemodern computer ports with monitoring cameras, allowing the controller
to scan the perimeter. Since Utu was a senior Anunnaki, he may have had
access to those cameras and codes, to guide Gilgamesh to the next point.
But the weapons which protected the port were awesome. In the cedar
forest he first encountered the “fire-belching monster” then “the secret
entrance to the tunnels of the Anunnaki they found…By the Bull of
Heaven with deadly snorts they were challenged… and chased.” The
reasons why the text refers to ‘they’ is because Gilgamesh was
accompanied by a friend. But in the end he made it inside where he was
met by Ziusudra, the legend of the flood, who told him of a unique plant
which does have the ability to keep a man young. “Unique of all the
plants on Earth it was.” But the greedy Gilgamesh ripped the plant out
from its roots and made his way back home. En route he fell asleep and
the plant was stolen by a snake which was attracted by its fragrance.
Gilgamesh returned home empty-handed where in the end he died as a
mortal.
The fascinating thing about this story is the part about the snake, which
bears very strong resemblance to the events in the biblical Garden of
Eden. But in the Sumerian rendition of Adamu in Edin, it was Enki
described as the ‘evil serpent’ who came to inform and educate the new
earthling pair. Is it not possible that it was Enki the ‘snake’ who once
more intervened, this time retrieving what was rightfully his, the secrets
to eternal life? It certainly has very similar characteristics in the
simplistic description of the interfering snake. The fact is that Gilgamesh
was not just any old human, he was a great king of a major city called
Uruk or the biblical Erech. So Marduk used this event as justification to
bestow his own immortality on his kings and demand even greater
adulation from all. “If demigods the gateway to immortality are shown,
let this to the kings of my region apply.” He basically started to tell the
pharaohs that he could offer them a passage to heaven just like
Gilgamesh was shown. He dictated what is known as the Book of the
Dead, giving kings a step-by-step guide to reach the “boats of heaven”
and the afterlife on another planet. In return Ra would demand complete
obedience. Then he went on to decree that all the kings must be halfhuman, half god. “Let kings of my region of Neteru offspring be, to
Nibiru in an afterlife journey.”
The ‘afterlife’ which Ra was offering his pharaoh kings, was simply
the privilege to travel to Nibiru, and there live as the Anunnaki do,
eternally. These utterances should therefore not in anyway be confused
with the ‘heaven’ or spiritual afterlife with GOD with a big G; the
universal Spirit or Being which many people have begun to believe in
during the past few centuries. This afterlife of god Ra, was a fictitious
reality in his own frame of reference and the planet he came from, but he
did not have the ability to actually revive people from the dead and offer
them eternal life. That privilege was reserved for the top few Anunnaki
only. The ME which Marduk/Ra received from his father Enki, gave him
many powers to rule, but they did not give him the knowledge to revive
people from the dead. Despite his inability to deliver kings to the
afterlife, Ra dictated his 'Book of the Dead' to his scribes outlining every
step of the way “How to reach the Duat, the place of celestial boats…By a
Stairway to Heaven, to the imperishable planet journey...How to build
tombs facing eastward.” As part of his rapid expansion plan, Marduk
instructed his followers to invade other lands in the Abzu to seize gold
from them, who were mostly his own brothers' followers. He ordered his
kings to capture all adjoining lands to Egypt. “To be the master of the
four regions was his heart's plan.”
Marduk became so obsessed and arrogant that he bluntly proclaimed to
his father Enki, “The Earth is mine to rule.”
Nannar and his wife Ningal were in charge of Mesopotamia or biblical
olden lands which were assigned to Enlil. This was known as the first
region and was becoming very prosperous under their lordship. They held
12 festivals each year, one for each of the great Anunnaki. “Shrines and
sanctuaries were built, the people to their gods could directly pray.” This
first region was booming under the rapidly expanding civilisation.
Humans were learning everything, while remaining faithful and obedient
to their gods. Inanna liked to roam the lands to see and observe how all
the regions were progressing. She took a liking to the “People who in the
upper plain of the two rivers dwelt.” She liked the sound of their dialectwhich must have been different to her own. They were the Igigi who
‘descended to Earth from heaven’ from Lahmu (Mars). They knew all
about the beautiful Inanna but they called her Ishtar. This is most likely
the reason why the Igigi or Aryans moved east, following Inanna to her
Indus Valley region and laid the foundation for the Indo-European culture
and language.
Back in Sumer, the kingdoms were rotated between cities but Marduk
had none of that in his own Egypt. “In Shumer (Sumer)…Kingship
between the cities was rotated…In the second region, diversity by Ra was
not permitted, alone to reign he wished.” Marduk had a very close
affinity with all the Igigi who came to Earth after Mars had deteriorated,
since he was their commander for a long period. It was mostly the Igigi
who were the so-called ‘Lofty Watchers’or Neteru, whose offspring
became the future Kings of Egypt. Ra went further, he declared himself
“The eldest of heaven, firstborn who is on Earth…The foremost from the
earliest times.” He expected all the priests to know him as such and
praise him with hymns. Interestingly enough, he was not making anything
up in those statements, he was all that. But then he went too far and his
greedy or megalomaniacal character took over. He began to believe his
own propaganda with regard to immortality and suggested that he is more
powerful than all the other gods. That specific aspect of our human DNA
has been clearly illustrated by thousands of military leaders, presidents
and dictators throughout history – another harsh reminder of where we
humans got our genetic material from. Marduk declared himself as
follows. “Lord of eternity, he who everlastingness has made, over all the
gods presiding…The one who is without equal…Ra above all other
gods.” I don't understand what he was thinking, he must have lost control
of his faculties by this stage. Did Marduk expect the senior Anunnaki to
simply accept his attempts to snatch power from them so openly? But it
got even worse, he actually compared the pantheon of gods which
included Enlil by name and proclaimed that he was greater than them.
These included Enlil, Ninurta, Adad, Nannar, Utu, Nergal, Gibil and
Ningishzidda.
It is not surprising that the Anunnaki were very concerned but alsofurious by his behaviour. Marduk had become a loose cannon and
completely unpredictable. This was a whole new twist in their stay on
Earth. Even his father Enki confronted him, realising that his beloved son
had now gone too far and that he could no longer defend his actions
before Enlil. And for the first time we hear Enki speak very strong words
to his first-born. “What has you overpowered? Unheard of are your
protestations.” But Marduk was so high on the quest for power that he
could not be brought down to ‘Earth’, if you forgive the pun. He
suggested that his celestial sign was about to rise, which would give him
the power to rule. The “Bull of Heaven” which was Enlil's sign, would be
replaced by the age of the ram. He said that the “heavens my supremacy
bespeak…The age of the Ram is coming , unmistakable the omens
are.”(Ram 2220 BC - 60 BC) It is incredible to see how steadfast his faith
was in the heavenly signs. But what was to follow would bear the most
miraculous twist in all of human events, which caused the other Anunnaki
to suspect that maybe it was Marduk's destiny to become the supreme
ruler of the world. Incredibly enough, there is a Sumerian royal cylinder
seal which is dated from 2308 BC, celebrating the coming of the Age or
Aries; The Ram, which was the sign of Marduk.
And so started a frenzied period of constructing observational
monuments by which to predict the coming of the ages, leading up to
2308 BC. This would fit in perfectly with the many structures all around
the world which have been found to have such purpose. Everyone was
watching the skies to see if Marduk's prediction was correct, if in fact
they had made a mistake in their own predictions. This would explain to
archaeologists why there are so many ancient observatories scattered
throughout the ancient cultures. Before they realised how the
circumstances had changed, the gods were dependent on Humankind for
support on the ground. The war of the gods had arrived in which
Humankind would play a crucial part. “After the Anunnaki as gods
themselves declared, on mankind's support they instead are dependant.”
They needed to find a strong leader among men who could spearhead
their human armies against Marduk. Inanna found such a human by the
name of Abrakad who had such makings of a strong leader. Enlil madehim a king with “crown and sceptre” and they called him Sharru-kin or
Righteous Regent. The world knows him as Sargon 1, the first powerful
king of Akkad. The tablets tell us how a new unified city was declared
which housed the crown in the olden lands by the name of Agade (Akkad)
and the beginning of the great Akkadian empire under their leader Sargon
I, had begun. His task was simple; to ensure the obedience of all the
people of Mesopotamia. Historians are well aware of the many
astounding conquests by Sargon and we read in the tablets what
happened. “All the lands from the lower sea to the upper sea, to his throne
obedience gave.” There was a very good reason why he was so successful
and seemingly invincible in battle, because Inanna provided his armies
with the advanced weapons of the Anunnaki. A similar set of
circumstances which would assist Abraham in the future. “By Enlil was
Sharru-kin empowered, Inanna with her weapons of brilliance his
warriors accompanied.”
Marduk was watching all this warlike posturing by Inanna from his
lands in Egypt and when the moment was right, he pounced on the
unsuspecting city of Babylon where he established himself against the
will of Inanna. This was after all his city. “Babili, the gateway to the
gods…Dikes and walls in the place of the tower they raised…House for
the utmost god Marduk they built.” This is how cunningly Marduk
established his army of followers in the middle of the First Region, the
heart of the Edin, the heart of Enlil's lands. But Inanna reacted swiftly
and decisively. She attacked Marduk's armies with all the force she
possessed, destroying them where they had embedded themselves in
Babylon, in the process destroying most of the city. “With her weapons
on Marduk's followers death she inflicted…The blood of the people, as
never before on Earth, like rivers flowed.” We have to remind ourselves
that the gods were using humans, their slave species as their disposable
foot soldiers to do all the fighting and dying. We can now look at the
tales of the early biblical scriptures with greater understanding when we
read that god instructed Moses or Abraham to attack a certain group of
people because they were vile and evil and who were conspiring against
god. The people were simply doing the fighting for Enlil against thefollowers of Marduk. How else do you propose to explain it? Our history
books are written by the victors; and at this stage it was Enlil who held
the upper hand in the biblical lands, while Marduk ruled the roost in
Egypt.
Marduk was defeated at Babylon and convinced to leave the Edin. They
agreed to “Peacefully wait for the true signs of heaven” to point out
whether Marduk's age of rule, the Ram, had come. Marduk did not return
to Egypt at this stage and his people began to call him ‘Amun – The
Unseen One’. Naram-Sin was the grandson of the great Sargon I, was
appointed as the new king of Akkad and Sumer. Those were truly strange
times on Earth, as if everyone was waiting for something to happen. The
most desired event among the elder Anunnaki was to return to Nibiru but
the time had not yet come, because the gold collection in the Americas
was at its peak. Their plan was to exhaust the visible gold and only then
depart. But time was against them. In the East, Inanna was making plans
of her own to rule the planet. Marduk and Inanna were engaged in a kind
of a pre-war dance, each making it clear that they wanted to rule the
whole world. A strange situation arose when Inanna realised she could
make her move. “In the first region, Enlil and Ninurta absent were, to the
land beyond the oceans they went…In the second region Ra was away, as
Marduk in other lands he travelled.” And so Inanna made her move to
take control of all the lands. “To seize all power Inanna envisioned,
Naram-Sin to seize all lands she commanded.” And so he did as he was
commanded, historians will know these battles from ancient texts.
Naram-Sin moved through all the lands of Sumer, Akkad and into Egypt,
taking control everywhere. But he made one fatal mistake when he
marched his armies through the forbidden land of Enlil, in the Tilmun,
where the space port was reserved for the Anunnaki only. This is a great
example of how mangled the situation was at that time. Enlil was furious
and took no time to destroy Naram-Sin and his army and he even ordered
the destruction of Akkad. “By the command of Enlil was Agade wiped
out.” The tablets tell us that this happened in the Earth count year of
1500, after the Anunnaki began to count Earth years instead of Shar. That
would place the event at around 2300 BC. These were early biblical timesshortly before the appearance of Abraham and already god was
instructing his human leaders to attack and destroy other groups of
humans.
At this point it becomes clear how confused the earthlings must have
been. An emerging species on a new planet, not quite in control of their
own destiny, controlled by a number of different gods commanding them
to do this and that and to wage war on their neighbours, the humans had
very little choice but to follow the instructions from their brutal gods who
showed no regard for human life. The people were mere chess pieces in a
great game of global conquest played by the Anunnaki gods. The clashes
between the gods almost always involved humans, who never knew the
reasons for waging war against their neighbours. But as we see in the Old
Testament, this kind behaviour was commonplace. It was this
inexplicable act of aggression by one group of earthlings against another,
which was initiated by their god, that set the behavioural pattern for all
future human conflict. Humankind, which was just emerging from the age
of darkness into civilisation, perceived this kind of activity as ‘the
normal thing to do’ to invade and conquer your neighbour's land. God
would command his people to invade and attack, giving his human armies
the excuse that they were vile and evil and they were sinful against god.
But this god would differ from land to land, demanding total obedience
from the humans, or they would themselves be punished. This led to the
worshipping of many different gods by the early people of the biblical
lands, as they worshipped the specific god who led them into battle or out
of harm's way. This worshipping would lead to retribution by some other
Anunnaki god with a higher rank, demanding that people worship only
him. And so the clashes between the biblical groups of people would
continue for almost 3,000 years, driven by the power struggle of the
Anunnaki. It is all very nicely captured in the Bible, but the evidence is
now overwhelming that the entries in that particular book had nothing to
do with salvation and the eternal spiritual afterlife of GOD with a big G;
but rather, it was all a meticulously executed propaganda and mind
control by a number of vengeful gods, who were no more than advanced
humans with a higher level of intelligence, abusing humans for their owngain. And so we see this human behaviour continuing even today. While
some communities think they have elevated themselves above this kind
of primitive behaviour, just take a swipe at their religion and see their
reaction.
This was possibly the single most important period in all of human
history, because it was this continued confusion among Humankind about
the different gods, which set the tone for the emergence of the many
diverse religions visible in the world today. There can be no other
plausible reason for this amazing phenomenon. How else can it be
explained that one planet has developed so many different religions in
such a short space of time? The answers are perfectly clear in the many
Sumerian tablets and on the pages of the Bible. All we have to do is to
take the fear out of the reading of the book and rather approach it as a
historic record which was commanded to be written with a very specific
reason. To manipulate humans into a blind and fearful fanaticism. So
from a purely human perspective, the very first wars among humans were
fought on religious grounds by humans who were controlled by different
gods. And it is safe to say that since those early days some 3500 BC, all
wars among Humankind were also driven by religious beliefs, combined
with our genetically inherited need to conquer, which was imposed on our
species early in our infancy. But we see the incredible effect of the
inherited Anunnaki DNA rise to the surface and manifesting itself in our
violent behaviour. The amazing desire by Humankind to find peace has
shown that genetically we are actually created to be more peaceful. The
overwhelming majority of humans who strive for peace is a fascinating
phenomenon. Combined with our incredible capacity for benevolence, it
becomes debatable whether our violent behaviour is a characteristic
pattern which we have adopted from our makers, rather than a genetic
code which drives us to behave in such ways. In other words, have we
been nurtured into becoming violent or is our violent behaviour driven by
a violent gene? And so we get back to the ‘Nature versus Nurture’
argument.
The clay tablets seem to concur that the world was gripped in a state of
chaos and confusion. “After Marduk Amun became, kingship in thesecond region disintegrated, disorder and confusion reigned…After
Agade was wiped out, in the first region there was disorder, confusion
reigned…Kingship was disarray, from cities of gods, to cities of man it
moved about…To faraway places kingship was shifting.” The situation
got so bad that Enlil had to consult Anu on faraway Nibiru about how to
deal with the situation. They appointed a new king in the city of Ur, to be
the peacemaker and “bring an end to violence and strife…in all the lands
prosperity was abundant.” This king's name was Ur-Nammu, ‘Righteous
Shepherd’. Enlil had a very vivid dream about the coming of the Age of
the Ram and Marduk taking control of the world. It affected him so
much, that he dispatched his high priests to observe the heavens for signs
of the new age. In the meantime Marduk kept on moving from land to
land telling people of his supremacy, gaining massive support from
fearful and obedient earthlings. His son Nabu was also helping to enslave
more humans into obedience, with fear. Wars erupted again, “Between
the dwellers of the west and the dwellers of the east clashes were
occurring.” That sounds like a scene from the 20th century, seemingly not
much has changed in 4,000 years. Ur-Nammu, the “Righteous Shepherd”
died in a chariot accident, to be replaced by Shulgi. “Full of vile and
eager for battle Shulgi was.” It seems that by this stage the humans did
not need much encouragement from their gods to go to war, they began to
emulate their gods. This Shulgi chap was a real tyrant according to the
texts, with powers on the battle field and other powers of persuasion as
well, because he managed to seduce the beautiful goddess Inanna. It just
goes to show that as early as 4,300 years ago, women were already
attracted to men of power. As silly as this statement may be, there is a lot
of historic social behaviour to support it. This behaviour of women can be
defended by outlining the genetic code, which programmes the female to
choose the strongest male, which will more likely ensure the survival of
their offspring. And so Shulgi used his power to conquer lands and
women. “In Nibruki himself high priest anointed, in Unug-ki the joys of
Inanna's vulva he sought…Warriors from the mountainlands in his army
he enlisted…The western lands he overran…The sanctity of MissionControl Centre he ignored.” Once again, an arrogant human king made
the mistake of 'defiling Enlil's restricted area. “Once again the rulers of
your region all bounds have exceeded… Of all the troubles, Marduk is the
fountainhead...” so did Enlil say to Enki in anger.
And this is once more where we see the dramatic marriage of myth and
history. Enlil needed to find a faithful, obedient, strong human leader, to
oppose the chaos and growing human armies of Marduk. He did not have
to search long before he found the most enigmatic figure in all of the
Bible. The father of all the future biblical kings, Abraham. The father of
the Jewish, Christian and Muslim faiths. The Sumerians called him
Ibruum, the Muslims call him Ibrahim. He was a powerful human with all
the necessary attributes to command Enlil's army. The time had come for
Enlil to start using the same tactics which were employed by the other
Anunnaki gods and utilise humans as his own soldiers. His main
objective was for Abraham to defend his space port. “A princely
offspring, valiant and with priestly secrets acquainted, Ibruum was…To
protect the sacred places, the chariot's ascents and descents enable, Enlil
Ibruum to go commanded.” But as soon as Abraham departed from the
city of Harran to perform his new duties to his god Enlil, Marduk arrived
to incite the people and cause havoc. It would be this kind of incitement
and havoc which would entangle Abraham and his nephew Lot to become
spies for their god Enlil, reporting on the activities of Marduk and his
followers. Just imagine the kind of confusion which consumed the poor
ignorant humans of those days. One god demanding obedience, the other
god threatening punishment and retribution for disobedience. No wonder
the Bible is such a confusing book of constant conflict and war amongst
the human tribes, because in reality they belonged to different gods and
they were commanded and controlled by these different gods.
It now emerges that the main protagonists in the holy wars of the Bible
were the followers of Enlil taking battle against those who were
controlled by Marduk. Both were strict and brutal in their dispensation of
punishment and reward to their human followers. Those were stressful
times for the Anunnaki gods, who were in the final stages of their
expedition to Earth, suddenly having to deal with unexpected situations.The new slave species they created to help them obtain the precious gold
had now become their tools of war. By now, Marduk had reached the
point of no return. He summoned all the Anunnaki to his beloved
Babylon, to appoint him as the new ruler of the planet Earth. “In my
temple house let all the Anunnaki gods assemble, my covenant accept.”
Obviously the others responded with horror to such utterances by Marduk
and Enlil called an urgent meeting of all the elders. “To a great assembly,
counsel to take, Enlil them all summoned.” There was consensus that
Marduk had finally gone too far, everyone was extremely unhappy with
the tenuous situation. Nobody knew what to do, or how to respond to the
present circumstances. “Accusations were rampant, recriminations filled
the chamber.”
Enki was the only one who felt that it must have been fate which led
them to this situation and maybe they should not oppose fate but rather to
accept Marduk's rise to assume control. “What is coming, no one can
prevent, let us Marduk's supremacy accept.” At this stage Marduk had
settled himself in Babylon and basically taken control of the whole
known world of the biblical times. It included Egypt, Israel, Canaan,
Assyria, Akkad and Sumer. There were only a few Anunnaki strongholds
which were not loyal to the brutal god Ra or Marduk, known to most in
the world today as the biblical ‘god of love’. Is that not filled with deep
dark irony? There was much deliberation and debate about what action to
take against Marduk. The Anunnaki finally decided that there was only
one way to stop Marduk: to obliterate all his cities with all his human
followers who dwelled in them.
By this time Abraham had been a trusted and loyal general of the lord
Enlil, who equipped him with the best chariots available together with the
finest horses. Abraham fought many battles for him, mainly defending
the space port in the Sinai which was out of bounds to all humans. Lord
Enlil rewarded him with riches of all kinds, which included “...land as far
as the eye can see...”, gold, cattle and sheep and a host of things which
eventually made him the wealthiest man of his time. Abraham had a
crack squad of some 380 well-trained and well-armed soldiers for the
task. The weapons provided to him by his god, were so awesome, that thissmall group of warriors could smite an army of ten thousand men in a
matter of hours.
This made Abraham not only the wealthiest man in the land, but also
the most respected and feared. There are several references in the Bible
where kings and priests come to him for leniency and mercy. They refer
to his close ties with god, and that he should not forget their good deeds
towards Abraham when god wants to pour his vengeance on them.
Everyone was petrified of their god of vengeance, whom we now know
was none other than Enlil, the supreme Anunnaki commander on Earth,
whose command was under threat by his young nephew Marduk. On
several occasions we read in the Bible that angels came to Abraham,
enquiring about the behaviour of humans in certain cities. They clearly
used Abraham and his nephew as informants to gain information about
the activities of the followers of Marduk. Two of the cities which the
Bible mentions in great detail were Sodom and Gomorra.
We have already explored the events which led to the destruction of those
cities, but now we get a clear understanding of why this all happened.
These were only two of the cities under Marduk's control. From there, he
would marshal his large number of human followers and take control of
all the establishments on Earth, including the space port of Enlil.
And so, after the long debate by the Anunnaki in Enlil's chamber, the
fateful decision was made “to use therefore the weapons of terror” on all
of Marduk's people. It was not dissimilar to the USA-led pre-emptive
strikes on Iraq, in anticipation of some form of deadly attack by their
perceived enemy. Is it not ironic that 4,200 years ago, the same part of
the world was involved in a terrible battle, which by the sounds of it must
have been a nuclear attack that wiped out most of the people of the Near
East and Mesopotamia, otherwise known as Iraq? So the Anunnaki gods
would use these ‘Weapons of Terror’ on Marduk. If we look at the
geographical area, all this information makes a lot of sense. Marduk was
in charge of Egypt, the Sinai peninsula with the space port was virtually
just to the east of him and Sodom and Gomorra were just north of the
Sinai, perfectly positioned to launch an attack on Enlil's space port. So we
should not be surprised when the angels came to visit Abraham shortlybefore the destruction began, to get any final information about the
citizens of those cities and how they were ‘conspiring against god’. The
actions of the people were described in the Bible as “vile and evil”, and
Abraham shows some of his humane side as he pleads for the lives of the
righteous few in the two cities. We know the rest of the story, the angels
go to the city, talk to Lot, get apprehended by the citizens who suspect
that they are there to kill them and the cities are destroyed by incredible
explosions which turned Lot's wife into a “pillar of salt”, meaning that
she was actually vaporised.
The event described in the clay tablets are even more dramatic, but
clearly deal with the same situation. Only Enki was opposed to the
proposed action of terror, saying that “What was destined to be, by your
decision to undo will fail...”, once more displaying the Anunnaki's firm
belief in a higher universal power which included destiny and fate. It was
Ninurta, son of Enlil and Nergal, son of Enki, who were chosen to “the
evil thing to carry out.” And so the identities of the two angels who
visited Abraham, are exposed. The same angels who then proceeded to
Sodom to destroy it with nuclear weapons. And once again mythology
meets biblical history, but this time we have a real link with real names
and places. Ancient Sumerian tablets which predate the Bible telling us
this horrific tale of destruction and the same diluted version is in the
Bible itself. If you believe the one, you should believe the other. Except
that the Sumerian tablets give us a lot more detail which was omitted in
the Bible when it was compiled by humans 2,500 years later.
The deadly weapons were retrieved from their secret places and Enlil
revealed to the young Anunnaki “how the weapons from their deep sleep
awaken.” They were warned that the cities must be spared and the
righteous people in their cities must not perish. The crucial part of the
tablet which substantiates my assertion that Abraham was a spy, is when
Enlil tells his two fighters to “make sure that Ibruum is forewarned.”
Many scholars of the past have implied that the weapons used in the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorra must have been nuclear weapons.
These suggestions are not only supported by the descriptions of the
aftermath in the Bible itself, but the clay tablets tell us in great detailwhat actually happened. They even reveal the names which Nergal gave
the weapons before they unleashed them and they certainly leave no
doubt about what they were. “One without rival; Blazing flame; One who
with terror crumbles; Mountain melter; Wind that the rim of the world
seeks; One who above and below no one spares...” and the grand-daddy of
them all, “Vaporiser of living things”. There were seven weapons in total
with which the massacre would be performed. When the destruction
began the tablets tell us that “Athousand and seven hundred and thirty six
was the count of earth years then...” which would make it 2064 BC when
the destruction of Sodom and Gomorra occurred, the end of the days of
Abraham. It is also very clear from the tablets that Enki was mortified by
the actions of Enlil, as he writes: “On that day, on that fateful day, Enlil
to Ninurta the signal sent.”
Ninurta and Nergal began the bombing. The tablets describe in great
detail how “the mount's innards in an instant it melted…The rocks into a
gushing wound were made…The Earth shook and crumbled, the heavens
after the brilliance were darkened…Of all the forests, only tree stems
were left standing.” For those who have seen pictures of a nuclear
aftermath, these words present a perfect description. They also concur
with biblical descriptions. From there they flew to “the verdant valley
where Nabu the people was converting.” Nabu was Marduk's son who was
also a target. There they annihilated five more cities and as it says in the
Bible, “with fire and brimstone were they upheavaled, all that lived there
to vapour was turned.”
What followed is described as a typical ‘nuclear storm’ with darkening
of the skies, extreme winds blowing at hundreds of kilometres per hour,
distributing the deadly nuclear clouds of dust. “Gloom from the skies an
evil wind carried…The Sun on the horizon with darkness it obliterated.”
We must remember that these words were written before a single word of
the Bible had been put down. It is very difficult to imagine that the
descriptions in the Bible came from any other source than the same
events which inspired the writing of the Sumerian clay tablets. And the
incredible nuclear descriptions continued. “At nighttime a dreaded
brilliance skirted its edges…Wherever it reached, death to all that livesmercilessly it delivered.” The Anunnaki were astounded by the extent of
the destruction, they did not expect it to be so devastating. The nuclear
wind was distributing the deadly dust everywhere and in their direction as
well. There was no place to hide, the dust or “Evil Wind” would penetrate
every nook and cranny, as it rapidly moved towards Sumer, where the
Anunnaki had based themselves. “No door could shut it out, no bolt could
turn it back.” Ninurta and Nergal sent an urgent message to Enlil and
Enki. “Escape! Escape! To them all they cried out.” Those are dramatic
words which were followed by even more graphic descriptions of the
effect which the Evil Wind had on the people in its path. “In the streets
were their corpses piled up…Cough and phlegm the chests filled, their
mouths with spittle and foam filled up…Their mouths were drenched
with blood… From west to east over plains and mountains it travelled.”
Those words suddenly bring to light an even more horrific truth of that
particular biblical event. The Anunnaki were not only using nuclear
weapons, but biological weapons as well.
The terrible events of the recent past when Iraq was accused of
harbouring weapons of mass destruction, revolved mainly around
biological weapons. It is tragic that the 20th century witnessed a number
of attacks where biological weapons were used and the descriptions in the
clay tablets are a precise description of what happened in recent times
when people fell victim to such attacks. They fell where they stood; their
skin was burnt or covered with grotesque sores; their mouths filled with
blood; suffocating in their own phlegm. There is no doubt that those
ancient accounts are the gruesome description of biological warfare. How
is it possible that a 4,000-year-old clay tablet could have depicted such
events if they weren't actually real? It is highly unlikely and utterly
improbable that an ancient scribe would be able to imagine such events.
This level of technology predated the Dark and Middle Ages by three
thousand years, where the sword and horse were the main weapon. You be
your own judge to determine what the real meaning of those biblical and
Sumerian descriptions are. “Everything that lived behind it was dead,
people and cattle all alike perished… The waters were poisoned…Allvegetation withered.” But then came the incredible miracle which was
seen by Enlil in a dream some time before the event. All of the lands
were covered and destroyed by the “Evil Wind” covering them from west
to east. All except Babylon, “where Marduk supremacy declared, by the
evil winds was spared.” This was perceived as a miracle by Enlil and
everyone else among the Anunnaki. Finally they declared that “Marduk to
supremacy has been destined.” There was no other possible explanation
in their eyes and slowly they made plans to disperse, leaving Marduk to
rule. The Anunnaki show us their spiritual side once more as they debate
the relationships between fate and destiny and how it has shaped their
stay on Earth. But one can sense between the lines that they were tired,
focusing on completing their mission to find gold, and returning to
Nibiru. Although Enlil and Enki were energetic and vibrant commanders
on their arrival to Earth, the short yearly cycles had aged them, as was
described in earlier parts of the story. It certainly feels as if they did not
have the energy left to continue squabbling. They had done what they
deemed necessary, at the expense of their slave species. But now the time
had come to go home.
The years that followed were tense and hard on the surviving humans.
The old biblical scripts are filled with trials and tribulations of the human
tribes, under the brutal dictatorship of the new god Marduk. He skilfully
and cunningly controlled the human race, commanding them to pray to
one god only, himself. He is referred to as the ‘god of vengeance’ in the
Bible, and that is exactly what he had become. It was as if the many years
it took him to gain control of the planet, which was initially promised to
him, made Marduk bitter. He did not show any of the benevolent traits his
father Enki displayed towards the human species throughout the years.
The many demigods which people had worshipped in years past were
slowly disappearing under pressure from Marduk and the world was
being converted into a monotheistic society. He became the only god who
humans were allowed to worship. He demanded sacrifices of gold, food,
animals, and even humans. The early American cultures of the Aztecs and
their ancestors had a brutal ceremony during which human hearts were
extracted while still beating. There were as manyas 20,000 captives killedin one massive sacrificial offering to their god. There is no reason to
believe that they would have done something like that on their own.
There was regular contact between the ancient cultures and their gods.
Their actions would have been a direct response to a strict command by
their god. There were many other gruesome customs performed by most
of the ancient cultures. These barbaric customs only seem to have
surfaced once Marduk took control of the planet some 2064 BC, lasting
way beyond the Christian era into the Dark Ages which included the
brutal power mongering of the Catholics during the Crusades between the
11th and 13th centuries AD.
Now that the story has been told, we need to sit back, take a few deep
breaths to absorb all this information and ask ourselves a crucial
question. What the hell is going on? Have we been lied to and
bamboozled all our lives? Can the human race be so gullible and ignorant
to be so exploited for so long? The answer to that is a definite YES. You
don't have to go back in time to witness the willingness of humans to
follow a brutal dictator in huge numbers completely oblivious of their
own state of ignorance. Hitler, Stalin, Mao and Bush are just the obvious
examples of how people will follow a leader whom they believe will
protect them and make them stronger than their enemies. But now, the
obvious question we need to ask is, where are the Anunnaki now? Where
are Enlil and Enki and Marduk today? Are they around, or have they all
departed? Do they play any part in the confused state of mind of the
modern humans? This is a question which warrants an extended study and
would be a great subject of a book on its own. But I will dare to say the
following: If you had to abandon a paradise island which you had
inhabited for many years, because of some kind of ecological disaster,
would you not like to return at some stage to see how it has recovered and
developed in your absence? There is a very strong possibility that the
many unexplained sightings of UFOs may have something to do with our
ancient creators, checking up on the progress of their offspring. But we
have reached a very disparate level of development or possibly even
evolution on this planet. Some cultures are trapped in customs thousandsof years old, living deep in the hearts of rain forests, not showing any
signs of progress, while others are landing probes on Mars and cloning
new life. The Earth today is a very different place to what it was 1,000
years ago. So if we assume that the Anunnaki departed from Earth some
1,000 years ago, it would be unwise for them to arrive on this planet in its
current state of cultural and religious confusion. We would probably try
to blow them out of the sky on their arrival, trying to tell us that ‘they’
were actually our ‘creators’. Are they trying to help us or guide us? Who
knows. There is however an important lesson we should learn. The
arrogant way in which we treat the precious knowledge from our distant
past, has only extended our years of ignorance. As intelligent as we may
think we are, we still do not know who we are, where we come from and
why we are here on this lonely planet called Earth. If we allow our minds
to be opened, we can only grow as a species, allowing us to evolve faster,
both physically and spiritually. Because only then will we be able to join
the universal community of beings, becoming one with the Great
Universal Spirit, the creator of the universe and all things in it. I believe
that we are on the cusp of achieving this giant evolutionary step, but it is
up to us as a species to see it through to its conclusion. And on our path
of evolution and enlightenment, we must at all times remind ourselves,
that while we are in this primitive state of mind, things are not always
what they seem.