CHAPTER 17
Food for Thought In bite-size chunks
This chapter contains snippets and excerpts which were omitted from
the main body. It will add a little spice to what we have already covered.
Some of these are vitally integral parts of the debate, but in this format
they make a suitable dessert to end the rather lengthy tale of our origins.
Now that you have consumed a rather heavy meal, I trust that this
pudding will help you digest it.
God or gods?
There are various passages in the Bible like Gen 35:7-13 and Psalms
82:1, which create great confusion about god, because they mix up plural
and singular forms of the word “gods/Elohim”. Giving us more fodder to
question the presence of many gods rather than just one.
Goliath, Giants and Nephilim
Erik Parker tells us that the word Nephilim does not mean giants but they
probably were giants in size as most depictions from ancient
Mesopotamia showed the Anunnaki gods to be much taller than humans.
In Numbers 13:33, it calls the Nephilim the "children of Anak.” The word
for giants in Hebrew is Anak (singular) and Anakim (plural). According
to the Signet – Hebrew/English Dictionary by Dov Ben Abba, the word
for giant can be “Anak” or “Anaki”. We also find out from Parker that the
famous giants or “Anakim” were descendants of the Anunnaki and Enki.
Other examples of giants in the Bible are referred to as Og, King of
Bashan (Deut 3:1), and Goliath the giant whom David defeated (Samuel
21:15-19). This highlights another Sumerian influence. Goliath's name
which is Galyat in Hebrew, starts with the word ‘Gal’ meaning ‘great’ in
Sumerian. Today in the English language, we can use the word Goliath to
denote something big and gigantic. The word Nephilim, which has causedso much controversy among scholars comes from the root ‘Naphal’ – to
fall down. It is consistent with the word Anunnaki, which means ‘those
who from Heaven to Earth came’. Nephilim means ‘those who fell down’
or ‘the fallen ones’. In historical and biblical context it means very
clearly ‘those who have fallen down from Heaven above’. In Numbers
13:33 we read the following: “There we saw the Nephilim, (the children
of Anak, which come from the Nephilim) and we were in their site as
grasshoppers.”
Matthew & Jmmanuel
The Talmud Jmmanuel has been described as the original document from
which the Gospel of Matthew was re-written. The numerous examples are
astounding, often pointing to more fantastical occurrences that were
conveniently removed from the New Testament. Here is one more such
example:
Mt 4:1-11
“Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be
tempted by the devil...Then the devil left him, and behold, angels
came and ministered to him.”
TJ 3:33-4:51
“Behold, after these words Jmmanuel entered into the metallic light,
which climbed into the sky, surrounded by fire and smoke, and
passed over the lifeless sea, as the singing of the metallic light soon
faded away. After that, Jmmanuel was no longer seen for forty days
and nights... Thus, he lived for forty days and nights between the
winds of the North and the West, where he received the arcanum of
knowledge. During this instruction period he spent his days with the
wise saints of El and the guardian angels, the celestial sons...Thus
they spoke, the celestial sons between the North and the West,
before bringing Jmmanuel in the metallic light back to Israel, to the
land of Galilee.”
Egypt
Ancient historians like Manetho and Herodotus both agree that Egypt hadgods as its rulers. We can actually track this for an extended period of
some 17 500 years, dating back to well before the flood. This time was
ruled by actual gods themselves which was followed by semi-human
gods. The Turin Papyrus which dates back to Rameses II names the list of
gods starting with Ra, Geb, Osiris, Seth, Horus and Thoth among others.
But then it continues to list 38 semi-divine rulers who continued to rule
over Egypt under the guidance of various gods. In 1843 already, Dr.
Samuel Birch who was the curator of the British Museum announced that
the papyrus and its fragments had produced a total of 330 names which
“coincided with 330 kings mentioned by Herodotus”. The Egyptians
firmly believed that Ra came to Earth from a planet they referred to as a
“Planet of Millions of Years”. They also believed that the Ben-Ben,
which was the uppermost separate unit of the Great Pyramid, was the
vessel which carried the gods to Earth. Another name for the Ben-Ben
was ‘Pyramidion Bird’. Even then the technological advancement which
is depicted in the tablets is astounding. The god Ptah was shown to be
controlling the flow of the river Nile. With a succession of reservoirs and
gates which could be opened and closed, he could allow the river to rise
and fall as he wanted. Something modern engineers only managed to
repeat thousands of years later.
The Egyptians called the gods and their offspring ‘Ntr’which means
‘guardian or watcher’. We have discover that these ‘watchers’ played a
crucial part in the Pharaonic period of Egypt's history. When Marduk or
Ra eventually took control, he decreed that all kings had to be
descendants of the Neteru – ‘the watchers’. It was said that they came to
Egypt from ‘Ta-Ur’the ‘Faraway Foreign Land’but it could also have
meant that they actually came from Ur, the city itself. The straits of the
Red Sea were called ‘Ta-Neter’which connect Mesopotamia and Egypt
and were seen as the direction from which they came.
LIST OF KINGS AND CITIES FROM BEFORE THE
FLOODThis is just 1 of 6 existing copies of the pre-flood king lists which are
known to us at present. Written in Sumerian on clay circa 2000 BC in
Babylonia, the list outlines the beginnings of Sumerian and the
world's history as the Sumerians knew it. It provides names of kings
and cities of great antiquity. It is generally thought that the
‘antediluvian king list’ is reflected in Genesis 5, which lists the
patriarchs from Adam to Noah, living a collective 8,575 years. Like
Enoch – 365 years and Methuselah – 969 years. Is it possible that the
222,600 years of the king list is a more realistic reflection of the huge
span of time from Creation to the flood? The first of the five cities
mentioned, Eridu, is the area where the myths place the Garden of
Eden, while the last city, Shuruppak, is the city of Ziusudra, the
Sumerian Noah.
Translation:
“IN ERIDU: ALULIM RULED AS KING 28,800 YEARS. ELALGAR
RULED 43,200 YEARS. ERIDU WAS ABANDONED. KINGSHIP
WAS TAKEN TO BAD-TIBIRA. AMMILU'ANNA THE KING
RULED 36,000 YEARS. ENMEGALANNA RULED 28,800 YEARS.
DUMUZI RULED 28,800 YEARS. BAD-TIBIRA WAS ABANDONED.
KINGSHIP WAS TAKEN TO LARAK. EN-SIPA-ZI-ANNA RULED
13,800 YEARS. LARAK WAS ABANDONED. KINGSHIP WAS
TAKEN TO SIPPAR. MEDURANKI RULED 7,200 YEARS. SIPPAR
WAS ABANDONED. KINGSHIP WAS TAKEN TO SHURUPPAK.
UBUR-TUTU RULED 36,000 YEARS. TOTAL: 8 KINGS, THEIRYEARS: 222,600”
Code of Hammurabi: Preamble
While Hammurabi, the founding king of Babylon, was writing his codes
of law circa 2100 -1900 BC, he preceded them by the statement below.
This should leave no doubt in our minds as to who was actually his
‘living god’. Take note that historians are still not in agreement when
exactly Hammurabi lived, hence the 200-year margin.
“Lofty Anu, lord of the gods who from heaven came to Earth, and
Enlil, lord of Heaven and Earth who determines the destinies of the
land, determined for Marduk, the firstborn of Enki, the Enlil-
functions over all mankind;
Made him great among the gods who watch and see,
Called Babylon by name to be exalted, made it supreme in the world;
And established for Marduk, in its midst, an everlasting kingship.”
War of the Titans
In Sumerian ‘TI.TA.AN’ means ‘those who in heaven live’. There are
many breathtaking descriptions in Sumerian tablets of the war between
the Titans and Olympians, pointing to the fact that the gods were at odds
with each other for quite some time. There are several smaller incidences
between gods which are stretched over long periods. But then to humans a
10-year period is a long time, so it needs to be taken in context. The
Anunnaki gods had a completely different outlook on time. Their
immortal DNA made them less aware of the passage of time. It was
seemingly not an important factor in their lives. Here are some Sumerian
extracts describing the battles between the gods. It seems pretty clear to
me that this was not just a description of a stormy night.
“Thus, then, they launched their grievous bolts at one another;
And the cry of both armies as they shouted reached to the starry heaven
as they clashed with a great battle cry.”
Another tablet section states the following:
“The hot vapour lapped around…
Flame unspeakable rose high to the upper air…
The flashing glare of the Thunderstone, its lightning blinded their eyes,so strong it was.
Astounding heat seized Chaos…
It seemed as if Earth and wide Heaven above had come together…”
Vedic scriptures
The Hindus believe that the ancient Vedic scriptures are “not of human
origin” and that they were actually composed by the gods in a previous
age. There are fantastic references to the gods and their awesome
weapons. It was the god Tvashtri or ‘Fashioner’ who provided the gods
with ‘aerial cars’ and other mysterious weapons which appear as hand-
held items in ancient Hindu depictions. Among a host of others, he
created a trident for Rudra; a ‘Fire Weapon’ for Agni; and a ‘Bolt-hurling
Thunder’ for Indra. The Vedic texts talk about “…a triple seat and reins
of gold, the famous car that traverses Heaven and Earth.” And from a
translation of Mahabharata, The Epic of Ancient India we read a
translation by R. Dutt which contains the following:
“The gods in cloud-borne chariots, came to view the scene so fair…
Bright celestial cars in concourse sailed upon the cloudless sky.”
The texts also introduce us to gods who were “swift as young falcons”
and who were called ‘Ashvins’ or ‘Drivers’, who specialised in operating
celestial chariots. They are referred to as “the best of charioteers who
reached the heavens”. The Vedic scriptures or poems are truly a
remarkable read. I highly recommend that you look them up on the
internet and indulge in the large volume of work. It is so rich in graphic
imagery and grandiose action, it will enthral you for weeks. Within a very
short time of reading the first poem, you will realise that this was much
more than some hallucinogenic manifestation.
Flying vehicles
The Akkadians had a name for ‘the flying vehicle’ which they called Ti-
ia-ri-ta. Why would they need a name for such vehicles? Where did they
see them?
WINGED DEITIES AND DISCSAncient civilisations were obsessed with images of winged gods and
deities. These are just a few examples from various cultures.
SATELLITE - XMM NEWTON SATELLITE CHANDRA
Would the primitive people of the modern world look at these objects
in the sky and see them as winged deities or discs? We learn in the
Sumerian tablets that the Anunnaki possessed the technology to fly
around and monitor activities around the world.
Nature -Nurture
There has been an age-old tussle between philosophers and psychologists
about the effects of ‘Nature versus Nurture’. In other words, how theenvironment effects individuals as opposed to their genetic
predisposition. Many are still of the opinion that ‘Nurture’, or
upbringing, plays the dominant role in determining the eventual makeup
of an individual. Without starting a philosophical debate, we should
remind ourselves that in most such cases where the upbringing has
moulded a person, we are dealing with personality or habitual
manifestations of their character. Not physical or genetic manifestations
which are predetermined by the DNA, like colour of eyes, height, hair, or
even genetically programmed disease. You can eat as much fish as you
like, if you have brown eyes, they will not become blue. It has however
been noted that in certain coastal communities with high fish intake,
many people have developed deep turquoise eye colour. This was
however as a result of a genetic change in the individuals over many
generations which eventually manifested itself in such a dramatic
physical appearance.
Slavery
It is truly tragic to realise that humans have actually been enslaved
economically, culturally and religiously for 200,000 years. You may
throw all kinds of intellectual arguments at this statement, but the fact
remains that it has been this continuous oppression of humanity, which
has largely retarded our rapid progress. We don't know where we would
be technologically today if we had a global society free of oppression.
Capitalism versus communism
Humanity is by nature a communal species. Look at what we are prepared
to sacrifice for our families. We work relentlessly for the benefit of our
spouses and offspring. We don't expect any reward, we simply do it for
love. Okay, there may be an argument there, but in general, each member
of the family contributes to the greater well-being of the unit without
expecting to be rewarded for it financially. They all share the spoils and
benefits without much trepidation, allowing each member to enjoy
whatever luxuries have been provided for. In most families this behaviour
is extended to the cousins and nephews and uncles and aunts. In some
cultures such behaviour is even extended to the greater community whichmay comprise the local village. And then, suddenly everything changes.
The gentle communal character becomes the monstrous ‘capitalistic
beast’. Suddenly the concept of ‘what can I do for my community’ is
crushed by ‘what can I do for myself’. Capitalism is all about amassing
wealth for an individual, which ultimately means money. How can I make
the most amount of money with the least amount of effort? To achieve
this elevated level of wealth, the individual would have to at some stage
use and abuse other humans to achieve his goal. This will undoubtedly
mean some form of slavery or exploitation if you want, of less financially
stable individuals. Capitalism is a clear indication that the ‘greed’ gene is
so strong in our bodies, that we disguise it in all kinds of cloaks which are
meant to sweeten the taste of this bitter system. Capitalism is not only a
recipe for disaster among the human race, but I do also fear that
democracy has been successfully hijacked by a small group of capitalists
who have found a useful front to attain insane wealth at the expense of
the greater majority of humans. What is this insane chase for wealth all
about? Where does it end? Will one giant organisation eventually own the
whole world and use the humans as its slaves as it pleases? Where will
capitalistic greed and wealth get us as a species on a fragile planet? You
should give this some thought, and I mean deep thought. Imagine the
crew of Starship Enterprise in a constant struggle for capitalistic
supremacy…I don't think they would get much further then the edge of
the solar system. Even on board of that imaginary spaceship, there is a
well-organised communal structure, devoid of capitalist greed. Maybe the
crew of Star Trek are meant to teach us more than just about deep space.
But rather a whole new form of ‘communalism’, which transcends
capitalism into the 22nd millennium and into the final frontier of new
socio-economic disciplines.
Gold
The Sumerian word Za-ab means ‘gold’ which is Ab-zu in reverse. Abzu
was the name for Africa, where the gold was extracted in great quantity.
It meant ‘The Primeval Source’.
PyramidsThe Great Pyramid was the tallest building in the world for thousands of
years. The first modern structure to surpass its height was the Eiffel
tower. According to Zahi Hawass, the respected and famous Egyptian
archaeologist, there are 104 pyramids remaining in Egypt, 54 of which
have 'substructures' meaning that they have some sort of passages and
rooms built underneath the pyramid. As far as my research has shown,
there is only one pyramid with a complex of internal chambers, in the
middle of the pyramid - The Great Pyramid. We should not find that
surprising as it does not take a genius to figure out that this would be the
most difficult aspect of such giant structures to plan and execute. It is
much easier to create the passages and rooms in the foundation of the
pyramids and then build the rest on top of it. But many of the pyramids
are hardly recognisable as such and look more like mounds of rubble.
Indicating that the only three 'properly' built pyramids were the Giza
pyramids which actually still survive in their awesome splendour. The
two Great Pyramids were also the largest Egyptian pyramids built. While
most of the others which were built later hardly stand, mostly collapsed
and reduced to rubble, those three Great pyramids of Giza keep
astounding us with their architectural ingenious. They did not collapse,
they inspired later kings to build similar structures and yet no other
pharaoh, irrespective of his power or wealth, could imitate the original
three pyramids in their complexity. Just imagine the sequence of events
according ot he popular historical theory Narmer, the first king of Egypt
unified a bunch of peasant farmers who eked out a living along the Nile
some 3 200 BC. He declared himself the king of the entire Ehypt andfought wars against invading armies. He was succeeded by Menes, the
first king of 30 dynasties. And sometime during the early part of the Old
Kingdom, before building any of the other pyramids with the exception of
possibly one, they built the three Great Pyramids of Giza. If Narmer
unified a bunch of peasants under him, where did he get his knowledge
and wisdom from? Where among the farmesrs did the later kings find the
ingenious builders with the sudden knowledge to construct the most
complex of all the pyramids? It all sounds a little suspicious to me. Even
today, if you went around the world and rounded up thousands of farmers,
asking them to construct a pyramid the size of the Great Pyramid, you
would not succeed. So, I would urge you to think about this whole
pyramid thing as practically and realistically as you can and don't be
influenced by the popular fairytales spewed forth by blind historians. Just
to give you some food for thought, there are 56 perfectly polished slabs
of granite in the King's Vhapber, each weighing about 54 tons. Those had
to be quarried some 900 kilometres south of Giza at Aswanand brought
all the way to the building site. Then they had to lift and place into
position the giant blocks, shich today could only be picked up by a
handful of modern cranes. But some of the stones in the mortuary temple
of Menkaure, the 3rd and smallest Giza pyramid, are over 200 tons in
weight.Great Pyramid (Khufu)
Pyramid of Djoser substructureExtract from the restoration stela of Tutankhamen as translated by Sir
Alan Gardiner:
“When his majesty arose as king of the temples of the gods and
goddesses ….The Delta had fallen into decay, their shrines had
fallen into desolation and become ruins overgrown with weeds…The
gods had turned their back on the land.”
This is in keeping with Marduk's rise and eventual abandonment of Egypt
between 3200 and 1200 BC, leaving behind an impoverished Egypt and
kings who were losing power. Mainly because their god Marduk had
deserted them.
Colour of the Pharaohs
I find it fascinating that the different kings and queens of Egypt are
depicted as having different skin colours. Some are seen as very light-
skinned, others have a darker reddish hue to their skin, while some are
quite dark-skinned. It is also notable that the slaves and workers around
the kings and queens are almost always depicted as being of a darker skin
colour than the royalty. Should we be surprised by this? It tells us in the
tablets that Marduk decreed that all the kings would have to be
descendants of the Neteru or Igigi. I have already pointed out that those
were advanced gods and followers of Marduk for many thousands of
years and they were the eventual Aryans who were white and
technologically advanced. It is therefore not surprising that as time went
by and the Pharaohs interbred, the latter kings were darker in skin colour,
much closer to the original humans who were “red-hued” in skin colour
according to the Sumerian tablets. The workers and slaves have often
been referred to as the ‘black-headed people’ in ancient scripts. It seems
as if the race card has played a pivotal role in human history since the
very origins of humanity. It was only towards the end of the Egyptian
Empire when the Nubian kings invaded Egypt and became kings of
Egypt, that we see the emergence of ‘black’ kings in Egypt. And where
did these black Nubian kings come from? Africa of course!
African KingsAfrican Kingdoms have survived longer than any of the other global
civilisations, arguably starting around 2,000 BC and still existing today.
There are however ruins in Monomotapa, southern Africa, which include
the Great Zimbabwe ruins, which could be many thousands of years old
dating back to 100,000 BC or more.
Bible
There is no doubt that the old cities of the Bible were also the original
cities of the Sumerian gods. What there is doubt about, is why did they
write the books of the Old Testament, if the knowledge and information
was already there? If it already existed for all to see? They must have
been aware of it! Or were they just as ignorant as we are today? Looking
upon ancient works some 2,000 years old to them, not knowing what to
make of it? If one takes into account the amount of manipulation of
Humankind that was going on by the gods and the royalty, it becomes
evident that most of the working ‘slave species’ were pretty ignorant
about mostly everything. They simply subsisted from day to day, never
knowing when they would no longer be needed or sent into some
inexplicable battle.
Babylon
Bab-Ili means ‘Gateway of the Gods’ in Akkadian. All the historical
accounts of the Tower of Babel have the same objectives: To build a
tower to reach the sky or heavens.
God
The creator of the universe and all things in it, the GOD with a big G, was
hijacked by the architects of popular religions. They reduced the Supreme
Being to a materialistic humanoid with greed and vengeance as his
backbone.
Communism & Religion
The basis of most, if not all popular religions, is the concept of never
turning your back on your fellow man and always being prepared to lend
a hand. Is it possible that the concept of communism was the basis of all
religions? The stronghold of Qumran was a perfect example of acommunal society all sharing everything and living together. This is
where Josef, father of Jesus, lived and was educated. This was an Essene
establishment with lots of evidence that there was constant intervention
by angels and even the gods. Is this yet another indication that the
Anunnaki gods were actually communists at heart? That they understood
the basic principles of sharing and working together towards a common
well-being of the entire community? That is the origin of all human
culture which seems to have been passed down to us by the Anunnaki.
The concept of trade and especially money, only entered the arena long
after the flood and during the early days of modern civilisations.
Although it can be said that slavery, which predates all of these events,
was probably responsible for keeping a kind of status-quo among the
populations while providing food and luxuries to everyone.
Jesus
The Pharisees called Jesus “the man of a lie” referring to his teachings as
illegitimate.
Other gods
There is plenty of talk about other gods in the Bible and whenever they
are mentioned, they are immediately condemned to being vile and evil
impostors.
Malachi 2:11-12
“Judah has broken faith. A detestable thing has been committed in
Israel and in Jerusalem: Judah has desecrated the sanctuary the
LORD loves, by marrying the daughter of a foreign god. As for the
man who does this, whoever he may be, may the LORD cut him off
from the tents of Jacob even though he brings offerings to the LORD
Almighty.”
1 Corinthians 8:4-5
“We know that an idol is nothing at all in the world and that there is
no God but one. For even if there are so-called gods, whether in
heaven or on earth as indeed there are many gods and many lords…”
Saviours and messengersThere are several references in the Bible to the saviour or messiah or
messenger of god who will come to save humanity. But the identity of the
messiah is kept very dubious.
Malachi 3:1
“‘See, I will send my messenger, who will prepare the way before
me. Then suddenly the Lord you are seeking will come to his
temple; the messenger of the covenant, whom you desire, will
come,’ says the LORD Almighty.”
Submission to Rulers and Masters
It is unacceptable that a disciple of Jesus should condone slavery, telling
slaves to be proud and accept their unjustified punishment, because they
are doing good in god's eyes.
1 Peter
“Submit yourselves for the Lord's sake to every authority instituted
among men: whether to the king, as the supreme authority, or to
governors, who are sent by him to punish those who do wrong and to
commend those who do right.”
And here we are instructed to ‘fear’ god. Why should we fear our loving
maker unless he has some malicious streak up his sleeve?
1 Peter continues: 14-22
“Love the brotherhood of believers, fear God, honour the king…
Slaves, submit yourselves to your masters with all respect, not only
to those who are good and considerate, but also to those who are
harsh. For it is commendable if a man bears up under the pain of
unjust suffering because he is conscious of God. But how is it to
your credit if you receive a beating for doing wrong and endure it?
But if you suffer for doing good and you endure it, this is
commendable before God. To this you were called, because Christ
suffered for you, leaving you an example, that you should follow in
his steps. “He committed no sin, …and no deceit was found in his
mouth.”
The conniving god uses Jesus to mislead humans:1 Peter 23-24
“When they hurled their insults at him, he did not retaliate; when he
suffered, he made no threats. Instead, he entrusted himself to him
who judges justly. He himself bore our sins in his body on the tree,
so that we might die to sins and live for righteousness; by his
wounds you have been healed.”
Creation
The Sumerians would recite the Enuma Elish or Epic of Creation
verbatim on sacred days just as other religious scriptures are recited by
more recent religions on certain days. We see a great example of dual
histories when comparing Genesis to this book, written some 2000 years
earlier. Laurence Gardner has outlined some of the common elements
between Genesis and Enuma Elish.
Enuma Elish
Genesis
Divine spirit creates cosmic
Divine spirit is coexistent and
-
- matter and exists independently of
coeternal with cosmic matter.
it.
Primeval chaos, with darkness
Adesolate waste, with darkness
-
-
enveloping the salt waters.
covering the deep.
Light emanates from the gods and Light is created by God and the
- the firmament is created above
- firmament is created above the the
Earth.
Earth.
- Dry land is created on Earth.
- Dry land is created on Earth.
The luminaries (sun, moon and
The luminaries (sun, moon and
-
-
stars) are created.
stars) are created.
Man is created Adamu or Lulu
-
- Man is created -Adam. -God rests.
amelu.
It is important to remember that Genesis was written around 600 BC
while the Enuma Elish is several thousand years older. Dan Sewell Ward
points out that “The comparative brevity of Genesis with respect to the
Enuma Elish is probably indicative that it is far easier to edit out sections
than creatively add new ones, especially when there is a strong resistanceto originality in writing the holy texts of a religion.”
The Egyptian scribe Ipuwer allows us to make some enlightening
comparisons between Genesis and the Egyptian texts captured in the
Papyrus Ipuwer. Immanuel Velikovsky pointed out the similarities and
showed that the Hebrew Exodus from Egypt did actually occur at the end
of the Old Kingdom and not later as is often suggested.
Eddas and Vedas
Is it coincidental that the most venerated ancient Norse scriptures are
called the Eddas and contain a character called Rig, who talks about three
classes of man: ‘Slave’, ‘Freeman’ and ‘Noble’ – while the Hindus have
their sacred scriptures called the Vedas, of which the oldest is the ‘Rig
Veda'. The Hindu culture is well-known for their caste class structure
dividing people into four classes. Another clear link between the Aryans
from Scandinavia and Indus Valley.
Papyrus Ipuwer
Exodus
Papyrus 2:5-6: Plague is
Exodus 7:21: …there was blood
throughout the land. Blood is
throughout all the land of Egypt.
everywhere.
Papyrus 2:10: The river is
Exodus 7:20: …all the waters that
blood.
were in the river were turned to blood.
Papyrus 3:10: Men shrink from
Exodus 7:24: And all the Egyptians
tasting - they thirst after water
digged round about the river for water
for they could not drink of the
to drink.
water of the river
Papyrus 3:10-13: That is our
water! That is our happiness!
Exodus 7:21: …and the river stank.
What shall we do in respect
thereof? All is ruin?
Papyrus 4:14: Trees are
Exodus 9:25: …and the hail smote
destroyed.
every herb of the field, and brake
Papyrus 6:1: NO fruit nor herbs every tree of the field.
are found.Papyrus 2:10: Forsooth, gates,
columns and walls are
consumed by fire.
Papyrus 10:3-6: Lower Egypt
weeps… The entire palace is
without its revenue. To it
belong wheat, barley, geese and
fish.
Papyrus 6:3: Forsooth, grain
has perished on every side.
Papyrus 5:12: That has
perished which yesterday was
seen. The land is left over to its
weariness like the cutting of
flax.
Papyrus 5:5: All animals, their
hearts weep. Cattle moan…
Papyrus 9:2-3: Behold, cattle
are left to stray, and there is
none to gather them together.
Each man fetches for himself
those that are branded with his
name.
Papyrus 9:11: The land is not
light…
Papyrus 5:6: Forsooth, the
children of princes are dashed
against the walls. Papyrus 6:12:
Forsooth, the childern of
princes are cast out in the
Exodus 9:23-24: …the fire ran along
upon the ground. …there was hail, and
fire mingled with the hail, very
grievous.
Exodus 7:21: And the fish that was in
the river died.
Exodus 10:15: …there remained not
any green thing in the trees, or in the
herbs of the fields, though all the land
of Egypt.
Exodus 9:3: …the hand of the Lord is
upon thy cattle which is in the field…
there shall be a very grievous murrain.
Exodus 9:19: …gather thy cattle, and
all that thou has in the field. Esodus
9:21: And he that regarded not the
word of the Lord left his servants and
his cattle in the field.
Exodus 10:22: …and there was a thick
darkness in all the land of Egypt.
Exodus 12:29: And it came to pass,
that at midnight the Lord smote all the
firsborn in the land of Egypt, from the
firstborn of the Pharaoh that sat on his
throne unto the firs born of the captivestreets.
Papyrus 2:13: He who places
his brother in the ground is
everywhere.
Papyrus 3:14: It is groaning
that is throughout the land,
mingled with lamentations.
Papyrus 7:1: Behold, the fire
has mounted up on high. Its
burning goes forth against the
enemies of the land.
that was in the dungeon.
Exodus 12:30: …there was not a
house where there was not one dead.
Exodus 12:30: …there was a great cry
in Egypt.
Exodus 12:21: …by day in a pillar a
cloud, to lead them the way, and by
night in a pillar of fire, to give them
light; to go by day and night.
Source: Library of Halexandria website.
God destroys the enemies of the Israelites
The following chapter from the Bible is a perfect example of god's
partiality towards humans. How could god choose one group of people
over another? What happened to the others who lived in the lands? Why
were they so vile and sinful that they warranted total annihilation? So the
god of vengeance would clear the path for those who obeyed and feared
him while mercilessly destroying other groups of humans who may have
been aligned with the other Anunnaki gods. Such was the feud between
Enlil and the younger Marduk.
Deuteronomy 31:1 -8. Joshua to Succeed Moses
“Then Moses went out and spoke these words to all Israel: ‘I am now
a hundred and twenty years old and I am no longer able to lead
you.’The LORD has said to me, “You shall not cross the Jordan.”
The LORD your God himself will cross over ahead of you. He will
destroy these nations before you, and you will take possession of
their land. Joshua also will cross over ahead of you, as the LORD
said. And the LORD will do to them what he did to Sihon and Og,
the kings of the Amorites, whom he destroyed along with their land.
The LORD will deliver them to you, and you must do to them allthat I have commanded you. Be strong and courageous. Do not be
afraid or terrified because of them, for the LORD your God goes
with you; he will never leave you nor forsake you’. Then Moses
summoned Joshua and said to him in the presence of all Israel, ‘Be
strong and courageous, for you must go with this people into the
land that the LORD swore to their forefathers to give them, and you
must divide it among them as their inheritance. The LORD himself
goes before you and will be with you; he will never leave you nor
forsake you. Do not be afraid; do not be discouraged.’”
We get more scary examples of how the people feared the brutality of
god from Deuteronomy 31:9 -13 – The Reading of the Law and how they
were reminded to follow his every word if they wanted to avoid severe
punishment.
“So Moses wrote down this law and gave it to the priests, the sons of
Levi, who carried the ark of the covenant of the LORD… ‘Assemble
the people-men, women and children, and the aliens living in your
towns – so they can listen and learn to fear the LORD your God and
follow carefully all the words of this law. Their children, who do not
know this law, must hear it and learn to fear the LORD your God as
long as you live in the land you are crossing the Jordan to possess.’”
Once more we experience the incredible appearance of god in person to a
human, this time it was Moses. But the description is a little suspicious to
modern civilised people. The Anunnaki gods would not get away with
pulling stunts like this today and therefore we no longer see such
mysterious appearances. We also hear the obvious reference to other gods
and how it angered god.
Deuteronomy 31: 14 -18 continues:
“The LORD said to Moses, ‘Now the day of your death is near. Call
Joshua and present yourselves at the Tent of Meeting, where I will
commission him.’ So Moses and Joshua came and presented
themselves at the Tent of Meeting. Then the LORD appeared at the
Tent in a pillar of cloud, and the cloud stood over the entrance to theTent. And the LORD said to Moses: ‘You are going to rest with your
fathers and these people will soon prostitute themselves to the
foreign gods of the land they are entering. They will forsake me and
break the covenant I made with them. On that day I will become
angry with them and forsake them; I will hide my face from them,
and they will be destroyed. Many disasters and difficulties will come
upon them… And I will certainly hide my face on that day because
of all their wickedness in turning to other gods.’”
Then Moses continued to predict as he was told by god, that his people
will come under the influence of other gods, once they leave Egypt and
enter lands where other Anunnaki gods ruled. But god wanted to retain
the loyalty of these human followers among the other Anunnaki gods,
because it was with large human numbers that the gods fought wars
against each other. It was impossible for the gods to exert their influence
over the lands without the fanatical loyalty of their personal human
followers.
Deuteronomy continues verses 20-29:
“‘When I have brought them into the land flowing with milk and
honey, the land I promised on oath to their forefathers… they will
turn to other gods and worship them, rejecting me and breaking my
covenant.’ The LORD gave this command to Joshua son of Nun: ‘Be
strong and courageous, for you will bring the Israelites into the land
I promised them on oath, and I myself will be with you.’ Moses
continued ‘For I know that after my death you are sure to become
utterly corrupt and to turn from the way I have commanded you. In
days to come, disaster will fall upon you because you will do evil in
the sight of the LORD and provoke him to anger by what your hands
have made.’”
Genesis 3: 21 -24
God makes garments? God says that man has become like one of us?
Who is ‘us’? Cherubim with flaming swords? It sounds just like the
story in The Epic of Gilgamesh which talks about ‘Beasts with
weapons’ to protect the ME in Enlil's sacred garden. It also tells usthat the gods lived forever.
“The LORD God made garments of skin for Adam and his wife and
clothed them. And the LORD God said, ‘The man has now become
like one of us, knowing good and evil. He must not be allowed to
reach out his hand and take also from the tree of life and eat, and
live forever.’ So the LORD God banished him from the Garden of
Eden to work the ground from which he had been taken. After he
drove the man out, he placed on the east side of the Garden of Eden
cherubim and a flaming sword flashing back and forth to guard the
way to the tree of life.”
The following passages from Exodus 3 are astonishing. They reinforce
god's intention to decimate Canaanites, Hittites and others; to afflict
Egyptians with amazing wonders and other manifestations of god's fury;
and it even displays god's greed for gold when he asks the Hebrews to
plunder the neighbours for gold before they depart. Why would god ask
his loyal followers to plunder the gold from the Egyptians before they are
led to freedom? Why would god be so obsessed with gold?
Exodus 3:2 -20: Moses and the Burning Bush.
“(On the mountain of God.) There the angel of the LORD appeared to him
in flames of fire from within a bush. Moses saw that though the bush was
on fire it did not burn up…. God called to him from within the bush,
‘Moses! Moses!’ ... ‘Go, assemble the elders of Israel and say to them,’
“The LORD, the God of your fathers-the God of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob-appeared to me and said: I have watched over you and have seen
what has been done to you in Egypt. And I have promised to bring you up
out of your misery in Egypt into the land of the Canaanites, Hittites,
Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites and Jebusites - a land flowing with milk and
honey.” ‘The elders of Israel will listen to you. Then you and the elders
are to go to the king of Egypt and say to him, “The LORD , the God of the
Hebrews, has met with us. Let us take a three-day journey into the desert
to offer sacrifices to the LORD our God.” But I know that the king of
Egypt will not let you go unless a mighty hand compels him. So I willstretch out my hand and strike the Egyptians with all the wonders that I
will perform among them. After that, he will let you go. ‘And I will make
the Egyptians favourably disposed toward this people, so that when you
leave you will not go empty-handed. Every woman is to ask her
neighbour and any woman living in her house for articles of silver and
gold and for clothing, which you will put on your sons and daughters.
And so you will plunder the Egyptians.’”
God's favouritism
Who was Cain's wife? If Adam, Eve and Cain were the only people on
Earth, who was Nod? Where was the land of Nod? What ‘help’ from the
lord did Eve get to give birth? What other people lived there? Where did
they come from? Why did they only start calling the Lord's name then?
Surely they knew god from long before that?
Why would god not look with ‘favour’ on Cain's crop. Why would god
be upset with Cain when his crop did not produce high yields? Should god
not encourage and guide him? Who was Enoch's wife? Was she one of his
aunts; a child of Adam and Eve? We can only make practical sense of
these passages if we refer to the earlier Sumerian tablets, where
everything is perfectly outlined. But Genesis leaves many questions.
Genesis 4:1- 26: Cain and Abel.
“Adam lay with his wife Eve, and she became pregnant and gave
birth to Cain. She said, ‘With the help of the LORD I have brought
forth a man.’ Later she gave birth to his brother Abel. Now Abel
kept flocks, and Cain worked the soil. In the course of time Cain
brought some of the fruits of the soil as an offering to the LORD.
But Abel brought fat portions from some of the firstborn of his
flock. The LORD looked with favour on Abel and his offering, but
on Cain and his offering he did not look with favour. And while they
were in the field, Cain attacked his brother Abel and killed him.
Then the LORD said to Cain, ‘Where is your brother Abel?’ ‘I don't
know,’ he replied. ‘Am I my brother's keeper?’ The LORD said,
‘What have you done?’ So Cain went out from the LORD' presence
and lived in the land of Nod, east of Eden. Cain lay with his wife,and she became pregnant and gave birth to Enoch. To Enoch was
born Irad, and Irad was the father of Mehujael, and Mehujael was the
father of Methushael, and Methushael was the father of Lamech.
Lamech married two women, one named Adah and the other Zillah.
Adah gave birth to Jabal; he was the father of those who live in tents
and raise livestock. His brother's name was Jubal; he was the father
of all who play the harp and flute. Zillah also had a son, Tubal-Cain,
who forged all kinds of tools out of bronze and iron. Tubal-Cain's
sister was Naamah. Adam lay with his wife again, and she gave birth
to a son and named him Seth, saying, ‘God has granted me another
child in place of Abel, since Cain killed him.’ Seth also had a son,
and he named him Enosh. At that time men began to call on the
name of the LORD.”
Where did all these people come from? Who were the wives of all the
men who had more offspring, if Adam and Eve were the only two humans
created by god in the beginning? How is it possible that they were
moulding bronze tools when the Bronze Age only started at the earliest
some 4,000 BC? And how is it possible they knew about Iron, when the
Iron Age only began much later, around 1,500 BC? This is all very
suspicious, showing that these chapters could only have been written by
ignorant people way after 1,500 BC, when iron and bronze were
commonly used.
Gold & Genesis 2:10 -12
The Bible has hardly ‘taken off’ when god already displays his lust for
gold. Why would god be so obsessed with gold right from the very
beginning of humanity on Earth?
“A river watering the garden flowed from Eden; from there it was
separated into four headwaters. The name of the first is the Pishon; it
winds through the entire land of Havilah, where there is gold. The
gold of that land is good…”
Genesis 8:18 -21
God smells the burnt frying meat and describes it as a pleasant aroma!
Was god a carnivore? If all the animals were killed by the flood, Noahonly had one pair of each in the ark. So when he sacrificed some animals
after landing, it means he just offered one of the only pair of surviving
animals left on Earth. A little silly, is it not? How did that animal
procreate without a partner?
“So Noah came out, together with his sons and his wife and his sons'
wives. All the animals and all the creatures that move along the
ground and all the birds – everything that moves on the earth came
out of the ark, one kind after another. Then Noah built an altar to the
LORD and, taking some of all the clean animals and clean birds, he
sacrificed burnt offerings on it. The LORD smelled the pleasing
aroma…”
God rewards with treasures
“‘ Don't be afraid. Your God, the God of your father, has given you
treasure in your sacks; I received your silver.’ Then he brought
Simeon out to them.”
Is this an example of the god of love?
Giving man poisoned water to drink, destroying their crops, their families
and sending poisonous snakes against man? Even the mention of a full
attack by a fierce army on horseback.
Jeremiah 8:2 -17
“‘They will be exposed to the sun and the moon… They will not be
gathered up or buried, but will be like refuse lying on the ground.
Wherever I banish them, all the survivors of this evil nation will
prefer death to life,’ declares the LORD Almighty. ‘The wise will be
put to shame; they will be dismayed and trapped. Therefore I will
give their wives to other men and their fields to new owners. I will
take away their harvest,’ declares the LORD. ‘There will be no
grapes on the vine. There will be no figs on the tree, and their leaves
will wither. What I have given them will be taken from them.’ For
the LORD our God has doomed us to perish and given us poisoned
water to drink, because we have sinned against him. We hoped for
peace but no good has come, for a time of healing but there was onlyterror. The snorting of the enemy's horses is heard from Dan; at the
neighing of their stallions the whole land trembles. They have come
to devour the land and everything in it, the city and all who live
there. ‘See, I will send venomous snakes among you, vipers that
cannot be charmed, and they will bite you,’ declares the LORD.”
Jesus – The godly offspring
If Mary was impregnated by an ‘angel’ through some artificial
insemination, the child could be some form of genetic offspring of Enlil
or another one of the gods, like Adapa, Noah, Gilgamesh and others
before him. Jesus must have known that he was special, he must have had
some contact with the Anunnaki who told him certain things about their
expectations and guided him along. God Enlil must have made him all
kinds of promises which made him go along with the whole plan to die
for the sin of mankind. While this was developing, the Anunnaki had to
think on their feet. They must have planned their manipulation and
activity of Jesus almost on a daily basis. This prophet's effect has spread
further than any of the others they had planned and planted.
Anunnaki Timetable
But the Anunnaki did not have a planned timetable of things to come. As
I said, they had to think on their feet and they did not necessarily want to
commit to any time scale. They would rather see how this ‘Jesus effect’
would play out among the people. In Acts 1 we read just that.
Acts 1:6 -11: Jesus Taken Up Into Heaven.
“ So when they met together, they asked him, ‘Lord, are you at this
time going to restore the kingdom to Israel?’ He said to them: ‘It is
not for you to know the times or dates the Father has set by his own
authority. But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on
you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and
Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.’”
And then Jesus was taken into the sky by some way which is also
described in the Talmud Jmmanuel.
“After he said this, he was taken up before their very eyes, and a cloudhid him from their sight. They were looking intently up into the sky as he
was going, when suddenly two men dressed in white stood beside them.
‘Men of Galilee,’ they said, ‘why do you stand here looking into the sky?
This same Jesus, who has been taken from you into heaven, will come
back in the same way you have seen him go into heaven.’”
Once more we have ‘angels’ intervening to set things straight just in
case the disciples had any other thoughts about what just happened. They
needed to be reminded that Jesus was actually taken into ‘heaven’ and not
by some other weird set of events.
Messiah & Saviour
The Jews were waiting for a messiah to save them from the Romans and
not necessarily someone who would preach ‘to turn the other cheek’. We
learn in Luke 24:19 that even his disciples thought Jesus was going to
defeat the Romans and “Redeem Israel...”
Different prophets
Different prophets and messiahs planted by the Anunnaki gods in various
parts of the world would have a disturbing but premeditated effect on
humans. It would confuse and divide humanity, keeping them religiously
enslaved and in fear for millennia.
Angels control the apostles
After the apostles were put in jail, an angel appeared and set them free
without any sign of force. This was a wonderfully calculated intervention
by the Anunnaki gods to get the apostles on their side as well. They had
to believe in the power of god. Now the apostles would be lifelong
believers in god, his miraculous angels and their power.
Acts 5:8 -21
“They arrested the apostles and put them in the public jail. But
during the night an angel of the Lord opened the doors of the jail and
brought them out. ‘Go, stand in the temple courts,’ he said, ‘and tell
the people the full message of this new life.’ At daybreak they
entered the temple courts, as they had been told, and began to teach
the people.”Jesus' legions of angels
When Jesus was confronted by a group of men with swords wanting to
kill him he must have made quite an impression, because they put away
their swords and obeyed him. The impression he made was in his
reference to “legions of angels”. The people of the time were quite aware
of the angels who made their regular appearances and they were also
aware of the power of the angels who had fierce weapons to destroy. It
seems that Jesus played the powerful Anunnaki card very effectively.
Matthew 26:53
“Do you think I cannot call on my Father, and he will at once put at
my disposal more than twelve legions of angels?”
Ancient Fatherly Advice
From the Ancient History Sourcebook comes this amazing bit of fatherly
advice which Shakespeare would have been proud of. It does however
enforce the importance that slavery played throughout the ages and the
relationship and fear of god in those days, indicating that god had a
physical interaction with humans on a regular basis. It deals with the
basic tenets of law and order and it also points to the early evolution of
philosophy among humans. What is most interesting however is the
concept of ‘love thy neighbour and thy enemy’ which was only really
promoted in earnest by Jesus some 2,200 years later. It highlights the
confused state of the time when the Old Testament was about to start
preaching ‘an eye for an eye’ and yet some individuals had a completely
opposing view of such things. These words shine a bright light on the
control that was soon to be enforced on Humankind by Enlil and his foe
Marduk in an effort to control large numbers of fearful humans in the
early days of the Old Testament. To achieve this, the gods would begin a
relentless campaign of punishment and abuse of humanity, ushering in
the early days of Abraham.
The Advice of an Akkadian Father to His Son, circa 2,200 BC:
“Do not set out to stand around in the assembly. Do not loiter where
there is a dispute, for in the dispute they will have you as an
observer. Then you will be made a witness for them, and they willinvolve you in a lawsuit to affirm something that does not concern
you. In case of a dispute, get away from it, disregard it! If a dispute
involving you should flare up, calm it down. Adispute is a covered
pit, a wall which can cover over its foes; it brings to mind what one
has forgotten and makes an accusation against a man. Do not return
evil to your adversary; requite with kindness the one who does evil
to you, maintain justice for your enemy, be friendly to your enemy.
Give food to eat, beer to drink, grant what is requested, provide for and
treat with honour. At this one's god takes pleasure. It is pleasing to
Shamash, who will repay him with favour. Do good things, be kind all
your days.
Do not honour a slave girl in your house; she should not rule your
bedroom like a wife, do not give yourself over to slave girls...Let this be
said among your people: ‘The household which a slave girl rules, she
disrupts.’
Do not marry a prostitute, whose husbands are legion, an Ishtar-woman
who is dedicated to a god, a kulmashitu-woman...When you have trouble,
she will not support you, when you have a dispute she will be a mocker.
There is no reverence or submissiveness in her. Even if she is powerful in
the household, get rid of her, for she pricks up her ears for the footsteps
of another.
My son, if it be the wish of a ruler that you belong to him, if you are
entrusted with his closely guarded seal, open his treasure house and enter
it, for no one but you may do it. Uncounted wealth you will find inside,
but do not covet any of that, nor set your mind on a secret crime, for
afterwards the matter will be investigated and the secret crime which you
committed will be exposed.
Do not speak ill, speak only good. Do not say evil things, speak well of
people. He who speaks ill and says evil, people will waylay him becauseof his debt to Shamash. Do not talk too freely, watch what you say. Do
not express your innermost thoughts even when you are alone. What you
say in haste you may regret later. Exert yourself to restrain your speech.
Worship your god every day. Sacrifice and pious utterance are the proper
accompaniment of incense. Have a freewill offering for your god, for this
is proper toward a god. Prayer, supplication, and prostration offer him
daily, then your prayer will be granted, and you will be in harmony with
god.”
(Source: J. S. Arkenberg, Dept. of History, Cal. State Fullerton.
Modernised by Prof.Arkenberg.)
This shows that people were quite ‘with-it’ all those years ago and they
had sharp minds. They were however fearful of the vengeful god. One
who was ever-present and had ‘ears’ everywhere to smoke out those who
conspired against him. We saw what he did with those in Sodom and
Gomorrah who conspired against him.
Assyria: “The All-Seeing god”.
We see another example of the fanatical control by god in Assyrian
history. The chief deity of Assyria was Ashur the 'All Seeing'. The people
were petrified to do anything suspicious or say anything out of line,
because god's spies were everywhere. God's behaviour is very
reminiscent of the Soviet dictators, especially at the height of oppression
under Stalin.
Crusades
Is it possible that the Crusades which started in the 11 th century AD were
orchestrated by the Anunnaki during their last near orbit of the sun?
Remember that about 600 years of their orbit is taken up when the planet
Nibiru is rounding the Sun and in close proximity to the other planets.
There are many such references to Nibiru in the clay tablets pointing out
its reddish hue and radiance.
MeccaIt is written that Mohammed encircled Mecca seven times before he
entered it and destroyed over 300 statues of deities. He did this under
strict instructions from god. Which god was it? Enlil or Marduk?
Remember that this was some 620 AD and the rivalry for supremacy
between the two Anunnaki gods was fierce. What we should however take
note of, is that the worshipping of other god-deities was still rife and 300
of their statues were destroyed by the newly chosen prophet. Who was
actually behind this? You decide, but the instructions were clear. Both
Marduk and Enlil or possibly some of their angels which remained on
Earth, were working very hard at establishing their respective leaders as
the supreme divine power on the planet which had gone out of control.
Ramadan
It is said that the angel Gabriel recited the Koran to Mohammed every
year during the month of Ramadan. Who was this angel? Was it the same
one who first throttled him to “recite the glory of god”? By this stage
Mohammed was obviously behaving accordingly and the angels needed
to ensure that their new prophet was not going to weasel out on them. So
they sat him down once a year and reminded him of his mission.
Last Pyramids
The last Egyptian pyramids were built in Nubia, Southern Egypt/Sudan
around 300 AD by the black Nubian kings. These kings wielded extreme
power, they dressed in exquisite leather clothing and they also created the
largest sarcophagus ever found. Like their predecessors they were
obsessed by gold and piles of gold have been found in secret chambers.
Gods & Angels
Most of the gods we read about in ancient mythology became ‘angels’ in
the Koran and the Bible, interacting with the human slaves, giving them
instructions, warning them, punishing them and even rewarding them.
During the early days of the Bible it was only really Enlil who was
referred to by the angels as god. He would often appear in person along
with some of his godly angels and interacted with humans. Later, it would
also be Marduk who was seen as god because he proclaimed himself as
such and he dealt ruthlessly with those who opposed him. Just think ofthe plagues and pestilence with which he punished his Egyptian Kings
from time to time.
Marriage
God, church and religion were not involved in marriage until the 9th
century AD. Until the twelfth century there would be blessings and
prayers during the ceremony and the couple would offer their own
prayers. Then the church became involved on a low level and priests
asked that an agreement be made in their presence and suddenly religion
was part of the ceremony. In the thirteenth century the English upper
class weddings became religious events but the church only blessed the
marriage and did not want a legal commitment. Only in 1563 the Council
of Trent required that Catholic marriages were to be celebrated at a
Catholic church by a priest in the presence of two witnesses.
Astonishingly enough, it was only by the eighteenth century, that the
wedding became a religious event in all countries of Europe. So we need
to be very careful when reading too much holiness into marriages.
Marriage was construed by man, not God.
First Agriculture in the World
Oxford University Press tells us about Abu Hureyra, an ancient village
located in the valley of the Euphrates River in modern Syria. It was also
in this part of the world that Enlil built his residence, in the cedar
mountain forests of Lebanon, not far away from this flood-plain and
valley. The village has shown irrefutable evidence of agriculture starting
as far back as 11,000 BC, possibly becoming the first known village of
farmers inthe world. Brian Fagan in Time Detectives agrees that
following the development of farming, the population grew and the small
village of Abu Hureyra expanded until it became one of the largest
settlements of its age in the Middle East. These were probably the first
humans who were taught such skills before the rest of humanity, mainly
because they were close to Enlil and had to provide food for him and the
rest of the gods of Mesopotamia. The village was occupied for an
uninterrupted period of 4,500 years, which is possibly a record for early
civilised human settlements. It was after the flood and after the successof this agricultural experiment around 11,000 BC that the gods began to
teach the rest of the slave species how to cultivate crops and other aspects
of civilisation. They did not rush into it however, it took several thousand
years for the great civilisations of humans to truly flourish. There is
however talk in the tablets about gods who taught some human slaves to
perform certain basic planting and harvesting even before the flood,
mainly to be able to feed the gods. This is confirmed in Time Detectives
by Brian Fagan, who shows conclusively that specific crops were
consumed and must have been cultivated in the Nile Valley 18,000 BC.
Once again concurring with other claims that Egypt had been settled by
the gods for some 17,500 years before the common era.
Ancient Mining in America
On the 15 March 1865 an article by Albert D. Hagar appeared in the
Atlantic Monthly outlining ancient copper mines in the Lake Superior
region. We learn from Sumerian tablets that while the earliest tin mining
was taking place at lake Titicaca, other gods were responsible for
obtaining copper, which was necessary for making bronze, from lands to
the north of Titicaca. Could these be the ancient copper mines of Marduk
and Enki and other Anunnaki?
“IN the month of March, 1848, Samuel O. Knapp and J. B.
Townsend discovered, from tracks in the snow, that a hedgehog had
taken up his winter-quarters in a cavity of a ledge of rocks, about
twelve miles from Ontonagon, Lake Superior, which was in the
neighbourhood of the Minnesota Copper Mine. In order to capture
their game, they procured a pick and shovel, and commenced an
excavation by removing the vegetable mould and rubbish that had
accumulated about the mouth of what proved to be a small cavern in
the rock. At the depth of a few feet they discovered numerous stone
hammers or mauls; and they saw that the cavern was not a natural
one, but had been worked out by human agency, and that the stone
implements, found in great profusion in and about it, were the tools
used in making the excavation. Further examination developed a
well-defined vein of native copper running through the rock; and itwas evidently with a view of getting this metal that this extensive
opening had been made.”
“This was the first instance where “ancient diggings” – as they are
familiarly called in the Lake Superior region were ever recognised as
such; and this artificial cavern presents the most conclusive proofs that a
people in the remote past worked those mines. Upon the discovery of this
mine, attention was at once directed to numerous other cavities and
depressions in the surface of the earth at this and other points, and the
result was that nearly a hundred ancient pits were found, and in all of
them mining tools of various kinds. These ancient mines or pits are not
restricted to one locality, but extend over the entire length of the copper
region, from the eastern extremity of Keweenaw Point to the Porcupine
Mountains, a distance of nearly one hundred miles.”
Secret Texts
In 367 AD the Archbishop of Alexandria ordered the destruction of the
‘secret texts’ of the New Testament. He gave them to one of the younger
bishops with clear instructions, but the man was obviously not too keen to
destroy such valuable works. He disappeared into the desert and hid them
in such a manner in which they would remain preserved and possibly be
recovered in years to come. Could these be the Gnostic Texts which were
discovered at Nag Hammadi in the Egyptian desert in 1945?
Tree of Life
The Tree of Life referred to in Sumerian tablets and in the Bible, is
actually the double helix of the DNA. If we understand its workings and
structure, we can conquer all aspects of life and death.
One of the many seals depicting a tree of life and a flying god aboveother deities who are manipulating the DNA.
Nag Hammadi – Gnostic Texts
From the translations of Søren Giversen and Birger A. Pearson of the Nag
Hammadi Texts, we read the same story which in the Bible is called ‘The
fall of Adam’. But this time we are also told that god called the serpent
‘devil’. This means that until that point the serpent was only an ordinary
member of the ‘godly’ group of deities which god himself keeps referring
to as “one of us”. We have already explained that Enki was the Anunnaki
with the serpent symbol and from this point on, he became the devil.
Since we have established that the ‘Tree of Life’was actually DNA, it is
also clear from the script that it was the knowledge of DNA and genetics
and eternal life which the god of Eden was protecting.
“But God came at the time of evening, walking in the midst of
Paradise. When Adam saw him, he hid himself. And he said, ‘Adam,
where are you?’ He answered (and) said, ‘I have come under the fig
tree.’ And at that very moment, God knew that he had eaten from the
tree of which he had commanded him, ‘Do not eat of it.’And he said
to him, ‘Who is it who has instructed you?’ And Adam answered,
‘The woman whom you have given me.’ And the woman said, ‘It is
the serpent who instructed me.’ And he (God) cursed the serpent,
and called him ‘devil’. And he said, ‘Behold, Adam has become like
one of us, knowing evil and good.’ Then he said, ‘Let us cast him out
of paradise, lest he take from the tree of life, and eat, and live
forever.’”
In further translations by Bentley Layton of the Nag Hammadi scripts
called Hypostasis of the Archons we learn that the ‘snake’ was also
referred to as the ‘instructor’. Supporting the events which point to Enki
as the teacher of Humankind.
“And the snake, the instructor, said, ‘With death you shall not die;
for it was out of jealousy that he said this to you. Rather your eyes
shall open and you shall come to be like gods…’”Ered...
Is the Sumerian word for sunset which refers to the land in the west. It is
also the origin of the name for Europe, where the sun would set for the
Sumerians.
Deuteronomy 5:6 -11: God demands obedience.
After god Enlil saved the Jews from the Egyptians, he laid down the
rules. He needed these frightened people to obey him only, and at all
times, if he was going to have any chance of standing up to Marduk's
onslaught on the slave species. By now we are well acquainted with the
threats of punishment and endless violence against his slave species who
were more confused and more petrified than ever.
“ I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of Egypt, out of the
land of slavery. You shall have no other gods before me. You shall
not make for yourself an idol in the form of anything in heaven
above or on the earth beneath or in the waters below. You shall not
bow down to them or worship them; for I, the LORD your God, am a
jealous God, punishing the children for the sin of the fathers to the
third and fourth generation of those who hate me, but showing love
to a thousand generations of those who love me and keep my
commandments. You shall not misuse the name of the LORD your
God, for the LORD will not hold anyone guiltless who misuses his
name.”
Darwin
Darwin's famous statement was “Natura non facit saltum”. Which means
‘nature does not go in jumps’. One of the many criticisms of Darwin, is
that he denied the science of bacteriology to preserve his own doctrine.
Through bacteriology it becomes evident that evolution most likely does
occur in leaps rather than a smooth continuous evolutionary process.
Mutations in bacteria give us a great insight into this highly charged
topic.
Oldest Sceptre
The sceptre found at Abydos, in the tomb of the Scorpion King, is the
oldest sceptre found to date. It is thought that Narmer was most likely theScorpion King. Is it possible that this King Scorpion was the human son
of Marduk and also the first ruler of Egypt, given the task to unite the
land, which he successfully did? Remember that Marduk insisted that all
Egyptian kings had to be of ‘divine’ offspring.
Comets
Hale-Bopp – Last seen on 22 March 1997. This comet is on a 4,000 year
orbit, very similar to the 3,600 year orbit of planet Nibiru. The furthest
point it reaches in space is about 250 times as far from the Sun as Earth.
250 AU (1 Astronomical Unit = approx. 150 million km.)
Here is a list of some of the last comets seen by humans:
Name
Orbit years Last seen Closest Furthest
0.587
Halley
76.1 yrs.
1986-02-09
17.94 AU
AU
0.340
Encke
3.30 yrs.
2003-12-28
2.21 AU
AU
1.346
d'Arrest
6.51 yrs.
2008-08-01
3.49AU
AU
1.500
Tempel 1
5.51 yrs.
2005-07-05
3.12 AU
AU
1.358
Borrelly
6.86 yrs.
2001-09-14
3.61 AU
AU
0.996
Giacobini-Zinner
6.52 yrs.
1998-11-21
3.52 AU
AU
0.989
Grigg-Skjellerup
5.09 yrs.
1992-07-22
2.96 AU
AU
0.743
Crommelin
27.89 yrs. 1984-09-01
9.20 AU
AU
Honda-Mrkos -
1995-12- 0.528
5.29 yrs.
3.02 AU
Pajdusakova
251
AU
1.063
Wirtanen
5.46 yrs.
2013-10-21 AU
3.12 AUTempel-Tuttle
32.92 yrs.
Churyumov-Gerasimenko 6.57 yrs.
Schwassmann -Wachmann
5.36 yrs.
3
Kohoutek
6.24 yrs.
West-Kohoutek-Ikemura6.46 yrs.
Wild 26.39 yrs.
Chiron50.7 yrs.
Wilson-Harrington4.29 yrs.
Hale-Bopp4000 yrs.
Hyakutake±40,000.
yrs.
0.982
10.33 AU
AU
1.292
2002-08-18
3.51 AU
AU
0.937
2006-06-02
3.06 AU
AU
1973-12-28 1.571AU 3.40 AU
1.596
2000-06-01
3.45 AU
AU
1.583
2003-09-25
3.44 AU
AU
8.460
1996-02-14
13.70 AU
AU
1.000
2001-03-26
2.64 AU
AU
0.914
1997-03-31
250.0 AU
AU
0.230
±1165.
1996-05-01
AU
AU
1998-02-28
AU = Ave. distance of Earth from the sun which is approximately 150
million km.
Source: NASA
Space Flight
Until recently, there was a great fuss made by scientists and other
scholars about the complexities of space flight. On the 21st of June 2004
this seemingly impossible task, which was the domain of the US and
Russian governments, was matched relatively effortlessly by the first
privateer. Burt Rutan's team successfully built a humble and somewhat
flimsy looking rocket, which was piloted into space twice in one week.
Showing that it is quite possible for clear-thinking scientists to achievemanned space flight without astronomical amounts of taxpayers' money.
When looking at Spaceship One, the small and fragile rocket in which
they achieved this, one cannot but display a high level of amazement at
how simple they made it look. We should therefore not be amazed when
reading about advanced beings who could achieve such flight on a regular
basis without too much effort. Our time will come in the near future,
when the 'slave species' will also be whizzing in and out of space without
the effort displayed by today's space agencies.
More Flood Stories
The story of Atra-hasis and the flood is the most comprehensive of the
Mesopotamian flood stories dating back to around 1700 BC. Here is a
short extract from a James W. Bells’ adaptation, to support many of the
other tales about the involvement of Enlil and Enki.
“Enlil said, ‘I cannot sleep because of the bellowing of men, but I
cannot bring them under control because of my brother, Enki. He
protects them. Because he created them, they are his children. I will
see him about this.’ So Enlil went to Enki and said, ‘You persuaded
us to kill a god and used your power to create men. You imposed our
yoke upon them but you also had Mami gift them with the spoken
word. What you did was wrong, for men use their power to shout and
curse and argue with each other. Now, you must swear an oath to
correct the wrong you have caused. You must use your power against
your creation and create a Flood to rid the earth of men.’”Old Babylonian on clay; Babylonia circa 1900 BC. This part of the
Atra-Hasis flood story is missing on all other known tablets. There
are only some 13 tablets and fragments preserved of the Atra-Hasis
Epic and much of the epic is lost. Genesis tells us that the cause of the
flood was mankind's wickedness and violence. The Babylonian story
tells us that the cause was the noisy activities of humans, preventing
the chief god, Enlil, from sleeping. It also mentions the harsh account
of swollen animals and human bodies. This part was apparently
deleted from the biblical flood story, even if it would have been the
first sight meeting Noah as he left the Ark.
Translation:
“ATRA-HASIS, EPIC, THE END OF THE BABYLONIAN FLOOD
STORY: …IN HIS HEART HE DID NOT TAKE COUNSEL(?)...,
THE ANIMALS HAD SWELLED UP..., MANKIND HAD SWELLED
UP..., AT THAT TIME THE SAGE WATRAMHASIS SAW THIS.
HE SPOKE TO EA HIS LORD, (ENLIL WAS DISTURBED BY)
THE NOISE OF (THE PEOPLE)…”
Sperm of the gods
Why do humans have such a wild and immoral streak embedded in their
DNA? We inherited it from our makers of course! Just like the Greeks
and Romans, the Vedas of the Indus Valley display equally high levels of
wild sexual forays and immorality. In the Greek ‘Iliad’ we read about
wars of men and gods over beautiful goddesses, their conquests and their
fall in the pursuit of sexual domination. The Vedic scriptures are no
exception. 'Ramayana' is such an epic tale which talks about prince Rama,
whose beautiful wife was abducted by the king of Lanka of the island of
Ceylon, known today as Sri Lanka. A whole host of gods came to the
rescue as they do in Sumerian and Greek tales. In another episode of lust,
the stunning Tara and wife of Indra's charioteer the “Illustrious Rudra”,
was abducted by Sukra, an immortal god. These lustful abductions would
always erupt in a short but fierce battle between the gods. In this case
they actually took refuge with the ‘Prime Deity’ which resulted in the
grand leader and grandfather of the gods to come to Earth in an attempt topacify the earthly gods. And suddenly we read a sentence which supports
that god genetically interfered in the conception of the great prophets on
earth, including the Buddha and by deduction also Jesus. Tara gave birth
to a son “whose beauty overclouded the celestials…Filled with suspicion,
the gods demanded to know who the true father was…” Tara informed
them that the boy was the son of Soma, the “Celestial Immortality” and
so she called him Buddha.
Devils, Famine and Wars
Remember that the Indus Valley was largely influenced by the Aryans
who were followers of Marduk. They were at odds with the other
Anunnaki gods whose names were derived from gods like Ashur, Asar
and Osiris, assuming the roles of ‘demons’ in Hindu tradition. Much of
the conflict among gods was driven by famine. At first, the Earth
“produced food without cultivation” but when food became scarce, the
gods' eagles would bring down from their Celestial Abode a drink called
Soma, which they mixed with milk to sustain their immortality. Their
favourite sacrifice was “kine” or 'cow-cattle' which is in keeping with the
gods of the biblical lands whose favourite sacrifice was roast lamb. They
surely showed a great affinity for a good barbecue. Is that where we get
our appetite for lamb on the spit?
EDIN– In Sumerian means ‘Abode of the righteous ones’.
Our maker – the Serpent
The Serpent god features prominently in Sumerian history. In the
depictions he is often represented by a symbol consisting of a ‘star-and-
arrow’ which could be read as ‘BUR’, ‘BURU’ or ‘BUZUR’. These words
can be translated as ‘God Who Solves Secrets’ or ‘God of the Deep
Mines’. In the original Hebrew Bible, the god who tempted Eve is called
Nahash, which translates into ‘Serpent’ but also means ‘He Who Solves
Secrets’ or ‘He Who Knows Metals’. This further supports the argument
that the serpent who tempted Adam and Eve was actually Enki, their
creator, who wanted to uplift them with knowledge.
Mammi! Mother of the gods & humansNinmah or ‘Great Lady’ was the sister of Enlil and Enki who was later
called Ninhursag. She was a member of the pantheon of 12 Anunnaki
gods and was also affectionately known as Mammi, Mother of the gods.
Is it possible that her name has remained the global name for mother?
The Divine Weapon
Ur-Nammu was a warrior king who found favour with Enlil and became
his early weapon against the disobedient human slaves. He fought several
battles for his god Enlil which are reminiscent of the latter biblical tales
of warfare in the name of god, in which evil and vile people who were
opposing Enlil were subdued in their cities. What we do find out in
Sumerian tablets however, is that god Enlil gave Ur-Nammu an unfair
advantage by empowering him with secret weapons, way beyond the
enemy's comprehension.
“The divine weapon, that which in the hostile lands heaps up the
rebels in piles, to Ur-Nammu, the Shepherd, He the Lord Enlil has
given it to him;
Like a bull to crush the foreign land,
Like a lion to hunt it down;
To destroy the evil cities, clear them of opposition to the lofty.”
The circumstances surrounding Ur-Nammu's death on the battlefield are
highly suspicious and point to a setup by the gods. Maybe he just became
too popular and too powerful with the other humans so god had to remove
him and find another obedient slave. Ur-Nammu died around 2096 BC,
shortly before Abraham found favour with Enlil and went on to fight
many battles and spy for his god against those ‘evil and vile’ people who
conspired against god.
Abraham's Army
The Old Testament is very clear in its instructions to Abraham when god
commands him to move to the land of Canaan. So he rapidly took his
wife and nephew Lot and travelled south. We do not however get any
reasons why Abraham should so urgently move, nor do we get any clues
to his final destination. He stopped over at Shechem where the Lord
spoke to him. Further on at Beth-El he built a temple and called the lord'sname. He carried on travelling towards the Negev, a very dry region
where Canaan and the Sinai peninsula meet. Why on Earth would god
want Abraham to move into the middle of the Negev Desert? What was
so urgent that made god bring Abraham over many miles of barren desert
land into the middle of nowhere? The only significance it had in those
days was that it just so happened to have been the gateway to the
‘spaceport’ of the Anunnaki gods in the Sinai. Mount Moria, Mount
Zophim, Mount Zion, were all landmarks surrounding the forbidden
spaceport of the gods. But Abraham was not alone. He had a group of
‘Naar’ men with him. This has previously been misinterpreted as ‘young
man’ but the true Hurrian meaning of the word is ‘fast riders or cavalry
men’. This means that Abraham had a small army of Naar men with him.
What did god have planned for them in the middle of the desert? To
protect the space port against invasions by other humans. Even Josephus
writes that “Abraham reigned at Damascus, where he was a foreigner,
having come with an army out of the land above Babylon.” And so god's
golden boy would get great rewards from his god Enlil. Abraham was
Enlil's warrior and eventual spy, endowed with a crack squad of fighting
men and the latest weapons.
Erra Epos
The Erra Epos is the Sumerian version of the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah. This is how god describes the events in those texts. You can
make your own conclusions regarding its relevance to the events at
Sodom and its biblical similarity. “The people I will make vanish, their
souls shall turn to vapour.”
Marduk
Marduk had a much more sympathetic relationship with humans probably
because he espoused an earthling female. In several tablets we read of his
intentions and here is one such clear example from the time Marduk was
on his way back to his beloved Babylon. What we also realise is that
humans became disposable pawns in the conflict between the gods. The
tablets tell us that Marduk wanted to bring peace and prosperity to the
lands and “chase away evil and bad luck…bring motherly love tomankind...” But his adversary under the leadership of Enlil “...his wrath
had brought” upon Babylon, Marduk's city. And once again humans
fought under the instructions of their separate gods for a cause in which
they had very little say.
Amun-Ra
The god Amun or ‘Unseen one’ was also called ‘Amen’ by the Egyptians.
Many obelisks praise him endlessly and support the fact that Amen-Ra
was a god with a growing following of earthlings. It was in fact Marduk
who was preparing for his onslaught on the ruling gods under the
leadership of Enlil. In Cleopatra's Needles by Sir Wallis Budge, we read:
“ Amen, from being merely the god of Thebes, became king of the
world and king of the gods. He possessed towns in Palestine and
Syria, and a very large number of slaves, male and female, and the
commands of his high priests were obeyed unhesitatingly throughout
the lands.”
But in this remarkable book which is filled with endless praises and
prayers to Amun-Ra by the kings of Egypt, we get all the evidence we
need that the gods of Egypt were real physical entities who interacted
with the kings and their people, from the volumes of praises by the god
Amun-Ra for his kings and their followers. One such incident occurs
when Amun-Ra thanks Thothmes III for his conquests.
“Come to me, rejoice at the sight of my beneficience,
My son, my avenger…
I rise in the sky for thy pleasure (or love of thee)
My heart dilateth with joy at thy beautiful comings to my temple.”
This book is filled with translations of virtually every obelisk ever found,
and concurs that it was in fact Marduk, or Amun-Ra, who conquered and
united Egypt.
“Horus…King of the South and the North…He made them as his
monuments to his father Amen, lord of the thrones of the two lands.”
Favourite stories
Popular stories among the ancient Babylonians were repeated in more
than one composition. For example, the story of the flood is known in theEpic of Gilgamesh and from the Atra-hasis Epic. The most famous epics
and myths were: Gilgamesh, Atra-hasis, Adapa, Nergal and Ereshkigal,
When Above, Descent of Ishtar into Hades, Anzu, Etana and Era. Another
sub-genre is the historical epic of ‘The king of battle and Tukulti-Ninurta
I'.
Aryans & Jews
Adolf Hitler would have been devastated to find out that the relationship
between the Aryans and Jews long before Christ, was one of liberation
and compassion. Cyrus the Great was a true Aryan king of real Aryan
descent. Cyrus was the first Persian king who united the two original
Persian tribes of the Medes and Parsees. Where did he get all his
knowledge and power from? He was just another one of those Aryan
kings who appears in the biblical texts and nobody makes any fuss about
his mysterious arrival. This invader is treated by the Old Testament as
part of daily events. He is best remembered for his unprecedented
tolerance and magnanimous attitude towards those he conquered. Around
539 BC he liberated Babylon, freed the slaves and allowed 40,000 Jews to
move back to Palestine. He was known by the Hebrews as the “Anointed
of Yahweh” which was a very unusual relationship between a Hebrew god
and a non-Hebrew Aryan king. He is said to be the first king to release a
charter of human rights and was known as the 'Law Giver' whose main
objective was to liberate people from slavery. Was Cyrus possibly
another one of the Anunnaki prophets sent to rally humans behind one
god? He was the first Achaemenid Emperor of Persia who united people
everywhere he went and he was depicted with wings, similar to other
gods. The Achaemenids worshipped a deity called 'Wise Lord' who was
depicted as hovering in the sky within a winged globe. So who was Cyrus
really? Just another messenger of Enlil? A prophet who achieved
moderate success in spreading the new benevolent message of god while
preparing the way for Jesus? We should also remember that the Aryans
were called the ‘Lordly people’ by the Sumerians.
Furnaces
Sumer did not have ores but it was rich in fuels like asphalt, bitumen andother petroleum products. That is why the early kilns and smelting
facilities were established there to process the golden ores. And that is
also why there are many ancient inscriptions describing the bringing of
metal ores from afar.
Hammered Bracelet
The Sumerians were not the only ones talking about the asteroid belt as
the Hammered Bracelet. In Psalms it is outlined equally eloquently, also
describing a mysterious planet's orbit. Was this Nibiru? The planet they
all knew was the home of the Anunnaki gods?
“The Heavens bespeak the glory of the Lord
The Hammered Bracelet proclaims his handiwork
He comes forth as a groom from the canopy;
Like an athlete he rejoices to run the course.
From the end of Heavens he emanates…”
The Cross and the Planet of the Crossing
Nibiru was referred to as ‘The planet of the crossing’ which was depicted
by a symbolic cross in pictographs and in cuneiform text. It was also the
symbol for Anu ‘divine’ and it evolved into the sign of the cross even in
the Semitic languages, represented by the letter ‘tav’ which meant ‘the
sign’. Mesopotamian texts speak about the planet's appearance and the
anticipated effects it will have on Earth.
“The great planet.
At his appearance, dark red.
The Heaven he divides in half and stands as Nibiru….
When from the station of Jupiter the planet passes towards the west,
When from the station of Jupiter the planet increases in brilliance
And in the Zodiac of Cancer will become Nibiru….
Hostile kings will be at peace,
The gods will receive prayers and hear supplications…
The gods will give peace; troubles will be cleared up…”
The biblical Isaiah had similar things to say about the ‘End of Days’:
“ And it shall come to pass at the End of Days:
…The Lord shall judge among the nations….They shall beat theirswords into ploughshares…Nation shall not lift up sword against nation.”
Sumerian stone depicting Anu the supreme god; Nibiru, the planet of
the crossing; and the star symbol of the radiant planet Nibiru. It also
depicts the age of the lion; the scorpion and the ever-present serpent
which surrounds the stone. The crescent moon was the symbol used to
depict Ea/Enki. The association was probably made from the tidal
effect that the moon had on the waters of the world. Enki was
renowned for being able to control and manipulate the waters of the
world. Enki was also the ‘god of the water’, known as ‘god of the
sweet water’.
Furnace Master
Enki was assisted in the mines of Abzu, by a god called Gibil ‘he who
burns the soil’. Gibil was in charge of the smelting process and was
depicted with shoulders emitting red-hot rays or sparks of fire, emerging
from the ground.
Towers and Rockets
It is written that the Babylonians “wanted to make a ‘shem’ (name) for
themselves” by building the tower of Babel. The word ‘shem’ was
translated in the Bible as ‘name’. Zecharia Sitchin points out that the
word ‘shem’ which is used in the original texts was incorrectly translated.
The root of the word for ‘shem’ is ‘shamah’ meaning “that which is
highward”. Is it accidental that the ancient obelisks were made to
resemble ‘shems’ which had the shape of a rocket? Or were theyconsciously emulating the rocket ships of the gods? Why else would
Egyptians choose such a strangely cumbersome shape to worship the
gods? So when the Babylonians wanted to make a ‘shem’ for themselves,
it actually meant a ‘rocket ship’ to match that of the gods. That would
explain perfectly why god was so upset by their efforts and came down to
‘confuse their language’. The tower could have been a launch pad or
command centre of sorts for their intended shem or rocket.
Gold Booty
When Pizarro, a Spanish conquistador, entered the royal palace in
Cuzco in the 16th century, he found a chamber filled with 100,000 gold
ingots weighing about five pounds each. This was after extorting 200,000
ounces of gold from the Inca people by taking their king hostage and
demanding a ransom paid in gold. This kind of activity continued for
around 200 years displaying the insatiable greed for gold by barbaric
Europeans, and shining a light on the incomprehensible collection of gold
by an ancient civilisation.
Aztec Prayer
This Aztec prayer highlights the similarity in which they saw the god of
Heaven who gave them knowledge, to the Sumerian descriptions and even
later Judeo-Christian religions. This is a translation from the Aztec
Nahuatl language.
“You inhabit the heavens,
You uphold the mountains…
You are everywhere, everlasting.
You are beseeched, you are entreated.
Your glory is eminent.”
The American Wrath of god
Even the American people experienced the wrath of god. It is written in
Inca history that under the rule of Capac, there were a group of foreign
men who disembarked and settled along the coast. They had unusual tools
and were said to be “despoiling the land”. They eventually settled in the
mountains with their metal tools and implements. They provoked thewrath of the “Great God” who quickly destroyed them with a “heavenly
fire”. What were they doing to deserve such brutal punishment? Were
these a group of miners who decided to mine some gold for themselves,
not wanting to share it with Enlil?
Five Ages of the Incas
The Incas of the 16th century believed that there were Five Ages of the
Sun, each one lasting 2 900 years and that they were in the fifth age. This
calculation could trace back the origins of the Incas for about 14 500. The
first age was that of Viracocha and the gods who were white and bearded.
The 2nd Age was that of the giants many of whom were not benevolent,
often resulting in conflict between gods and giants. The 3rd Age was the
period of primitive man and uncultured humans. The 4th Age was the age
of heroes and demigods among Humankind, half-man, half-god. The 5th
Age was when human kings emerged, instated by the gods, of whom the
Incas were last in line. For the Mayas the great cycles last 1,872,000
days, which is 5128.7 years. Is it possible that the Incas used a similar
calendar with similar dating? In which case the five ages would go back
to around 23,000 BC. Such a suggestion would not be in conflict with
what we are told in the Sumerian tablets because Ka-in was well known
to have established a civilised people in the Andes by then.
Genetics
In 1909 British biologist William Bateson gave the study of inheritance a
name. He called it ‘genetics’. James Watson says “Understanding
genetics is not just understanding why we look like our parents. It is also
about coming to grips with Humankind's oldest enemies: the flaws in
genes that cause genetic disease.” If we are the pinnacle of intelligent
evolution on Earth, why should our genes have so many defects? Why
have these defects not ironed themselves out in the process of evolution
over millions of years? Or is it simply because our genes have been
purposefully manipulated, leaving behind an incomplete sequence which
causes inexplicable genetic mutations and disease, because it is only a
piece of the whole?Genes
We would assume that as the most intelligent or evolved species, humans
would have the most number of genes from among the animals and
plants. This is not the case however. The current estimate is that humans
who have an estimated 100 trillion cells making up our bodies, will end
up with about 25,000 genes once they have all been identified. It is
amazing to find out that a creature composed of only 959 cells, the
Nematode worm, has around 20,000 genes. Does that make any sense?
The mustard plant actually has even more genes than humans at around
27,000, while the Fruit fly has 14,000, Baker's yeast 6,000 and even gut
bacteria E. Coli have about one fifth of the number of genes in humans, at
about 4,000. It is proposed by James Watson that our human abilities
have evolved to make our genes multifunctional. “Humans, it would
appear, are simply able to do more with their genetic hardware.” Does
that make any sense to you? How could a gene code for more than one
specific effect? Would this mean that if we eliminate the gene that causes
cancer, we accidentally eliminate the same gene which codes for cell
division? I would suggest that there is probably much more to our introns
and junk genes than we currently understand. Their effects and activity
will yet be understood.
Was John the Baptist killed by Jesus?
According to Barbara Thiering, The Dead Sea Scrolls tell us that between
March and September of 31 AD, while The Baptist was under arrest, a
sinister plot emerged against him. Jesus, who was also called ‘The
Wicked Priest’ because he illegally claimed the high priesthood, is
accused of plotting against the Baptist, the ‘Teacher of Righteousness’.
Jesus confronted ‘The Baptist’ on a point well-understood by ancient
Sumerians: the fact that priesthood was received by ordination from god
and not by birth. Only the god of the time could bestow priesthood on a
man. This god was Enlil. Why would Jesus feel so strongly about this
issue of ordination? Because he was the instrument of the Anunnaki gods,
sent to pacify people and restore their faith in a single powerful god, one
above all the other gods of the time. And suddenly John the Baptist, whowas one of the other possible prophets of the Anunnaki gods was in the
way of their new golden boy Jesus. It is therefore quite plausible that the
gods required Jesus to get rid of the Baptist who was causing confusion
among the new converts. The Anunnaki gods wasted no time. But even
then the people required much persuasion that Jesus was ‘the one’ and
Jesus had to be bestowed with special skills and ‘legions of angels’ to
help him convert the locals of the time. The weird events and so-called
miracles are pretty much ancient history.
Bad Spelling
The excavation of the pyramids of Giza have been embroiled in almost
200 years of conspiracy and deceit, mostly relating to the legitimacy of
the discovery of the names of kings, supposed quarry marks and
cartouches with royal names inside the pyramids. It was Col. Howard
Vyse and his partner JR Hill who made these astonishing discoveries
under very suspicious circumstances. It involved the dismissal of trained
foremen and very private and explosive excavation of the pyramids'
interiors. It is very suspicious that it was Vyse who miraculously found
very coarse and unrefined inscriptions of the names of king Khufu and
later Menkaure in the two respective pyramids. The inscriptions were not
only much larger than the normally encountered Egyptian inscriptions,
but they are very rough compared to the usually refined and precise work
of Egyptian scribes. The worst part is, that the name Khufu had been miss
spelt in the Great Pyramid, and yet it was this discovery which led to the
pyramid being called Khufu. In the dubious inscription, the king was
called ‘RAUFU’ instead of ‘KHUFU’. Such a simple mistake would
never have been made by a royal Egyptian scribe. And yet, the whole
world has quite happily accepted these findings and ignorantly forge
ahead. It is this kind of continuous disinformation which adds to the
extended survival of the lies and dogma which entraps us as the human
slave species.
Mayan Flood
The great sacred book of the Maya, Popol Vuh, states that at the
beginning of time the “Great God” decided to create humanity and sobegan to experiment with “figures made of wood that looked like men
and talked like men.” But they fell out of favour with their maker because
“...they did not remember their creator.” Then the “Great God” decided to
destroy his creation in a great flood and start again. “The face of the
world was darkened and the black rain began to fall by day and by
night…The wooden figures were annihilated, destroyed, broken up and
killed.” But the ‘Great Father and the Great Mother’ survived because
they found favour with god, to become the father of the human race.
Book of Jubilees
We have already established that the Sumerian Noah was called Ziusudra
and was actually the secret son of the god Enki by a human female. It was
written in the tablets that Ziusudra looked very differently to his
biological parents, with his white skin, bright blond hair and blue eyes. In
the apocryphal Book of Jubilees we read the same about Noah. “His body
was white as snow...” It had a profound effect on Lamech, his supposed
paternal father. It supports that Noah/Ziusudra was no ordinary human
child and therefore he was the one chosen to be saved from the flood by
Enki. When Noah was born, his father Lamech ran to his father
Methuselah and said: “I have begotten a strange son, diverse from and
unlike Man, and resembling the son of the God of Heaven; and his nature
is different and he is not like us…He is not sprung from me but from the
Angels.” Lamech believed that his wife was impregnated by one of the
angels, which would be a sort of trial run for several more virgin births to
come. Both Jesus and his mother Mary were born by some ‘divine’
intervention by angels. We now know exactly what that means, don't we?
Coming of the Lord
At Shrinagar, in the Vale of Kashmir there is a temple which is called the
‘Jewish Temple’. It is the biggest temple in Kashmir and is also known as
the ‘Temple of the Sun’. We have already suggested that some of these
giant stone buildings were used by the Anunnaki gods as landing sites for
their “boats of heaven” or various air travel devices they used. It is very
curious that this particular temple has been found to have very high levels
of radioactivity in the centre area of a large flat rock platform. Thisphenomenon has baffled explorers for decades, but there is a clear
indication in the Bible which explains such a possible event. An event
which would be in keeping with the many appearances of god to various
humans. In this case it was Ezekiel 43:1 - 4:
“And behold the glory of God of Israel came from the east; and the
sound of his coming was like the sound of many waters; and the
earth shone with his glory…And the mobile vessel that I saw was
like the vision that I have seen by the river Chebar and I fell upon
my face…And the glory of the Lord entered the temple by the way
above the door…”
We can clearly deduce that something very unusual was happening here
and it was quite necessary for the frightened Ezekiel to ‘fall upon his
face’ for reasons of noise, heat and brightness of such a rocket ship
coming to land in front of him. But we get even more clues from god
about this event shortly afterwards, when he confirms with Ezekiel that
he had seen where he dwells.
Ezekiel 43:7
“And He said unto me, Son of Man, thou hast seen the place of my
throne, and the place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in
the midst of the children of Israel…”
Such references abound in the Bible and many other older scriptures
throughout man's prehistory. We cannot continue to refute such events
and ascribe them to some inexplicable miraculous activity inspired by
god. We need to be big enough and brave enough to face the truth and
dissect the historic facts for what they really were.
Credo Mutwa
Credo Mutwa is South Africa's pre-eminent mystic, Sangoma (medicine-
man) and visionary. His writings have inspired millions and his
knowledge of the prehistory of African people is simply mesmerising.
From his book Indaba My Children and in a number of recent interviews
as recent as early 2005 we get some sobering substantiation for the ‘slave
species’ theory. We have already shown with some examples of Africanmythology that the people believed in gods who came down to Earth from
the sky and created humans. Credo Mutwa shines even a brighter light on
it, while at the same time enforcing the southern African ‘cradle of man’
theory. In an interview with Rick Martin during September 1999 he had
this to say.
“The people of Rwanda, the Hutu people, as well as the Watusi
people, state, and they are not the only people in Africa who state
this, that their very oldest ancestors were a race of beings whom they
called the Imanujela, which means “the Lords who have come”. And
some tribes in West Africa, such as a Bambara people, also say the
same thing. They say that they came from the sky, many, many
generations ago, a race of highly advanced and fearsome creatures
which looked like men, and they call them Zishwezi. The word
Zishwezi means the ‘dival’ or the ‘glidal- creatures’ that can glide
down from the sky or glide through water. Everybody, sir, has heard
about the Dogon people in Western Africa… who claim that their
tribe or their king were first founded by the supernatural race of
creatures that came from the sky.”
But the real surprise comes when Mr. Mutwa starts to talk about the
Zulus of South Africa and the origin of their name.
“When you ask a South African white anthropologist what the name
of Zulu means, he will say it means ‘the sky’, and therefore the Zulu
call themselves ‘people of the sky’. That sir, is nonsense. In the Zulu
language, our name for the sky, the blue sky,’is ‘sibakabaka’. Our
name for inter-planetary space, however, is ‘izulu’ and the
‘weduzulu’, which means ‘inter-planetary space, the dark sky that
you see with stars in it every night’, also has to do with travelling
sir. The Zulu word for travelling at random, like a nomad or a gypsy,
is ‘izula’. Now, you can see that the Zulu people in South Africa
were aware of the fact that you can travel through space, not through
the sky, like a bird, but you can travel through space, and the Zulus
claim that many, many thousands of years ago, arrived out of the
skies, a race of people… who married their daughters…andproduced a powerful race of Kings and tribal Chiefs…”
Mutwa further explains that African people believe that “God was a
woman, the great Cosmic Mother. And, it is contrasted by the Abapezulu
belief that God is a man who dwells in the sky.”
This would support the Sumerian writings about Enki and Enlil's sister
Ninhursag, who was called the ‘Great Mother’ of humans and still
survives in many European cultures of ancient times. There is so much
more support for the slave species theory by African tradition that it truly
boggles the mind. Mutwa continues:
“According to the ancient books which were written by the people of
Sumeria, out of clay, gods came out of the sky and forced human
beings to work for them, to mine gold for them. This story is
confirmed by African legends throughout Africa, that gods came out
of the sky and made us into their slaves, and they made us into
slaves in such a way that we would never realise that we are slaves.”
(Exerts from an interview with Rick Martin 1999)
The cross as a symbol of healing has survived for thousands of years.
We should not be surprised that its origins are also found in the
Sumerian texts which point to the Anunnaki who came to earth and
taught people healing.
The Cross & The Planet of the Crossing
The cross is a mysterious symbol which can be traced right back to the
very early days of Humankind. The Sumerians introduced the world to
the symbol of the cross in many of their pictorial seals, where it
represented the divine symbol of Anu and the planet Nibiru.
Affectionately referred to as ‘the planet of the crossing’, because it
crosses the orbits of many of the planets in our solar system as itapproaches the Sun every 3,600 years. Just like all of the arts, culture,
science and technology which was bestowed on humanity by the ancient
gods of prehistory, so was the symbol of the cross. From a biography on
Credo Mutwa by Roman Thomas we learn that the symbol of the cross
was well-known to the African people long before the missionaries
arrived on the continent. In fact, the Africans had been familiar with three
types of crosses from the “remotest of remote times”. They were used by
healers for good purposes or evil ones. There was the ‘T’cross which was
known as the ‘Tau’ cross in Western mysticism; there was the ‘Jesus’
cross, obviously not related to Jesus; and then they also knew the ‘unsaid’
cross. Roman Thomas writes the words of Credo Mutwa: “Then there was
the unsaid cross, known to white people as the Ankh, which many western
thinkers wrongly assume to have been only known to the ancient
Egyptians. This ankh was actually known by our people as the knot of
eternity, or the knot of eternal life, and it was used even by Khoi San
people, for purposes of healing.”
The Khoi Khoi, Zulu, Xhosa, Swazi and other Nguni speaking people
all believed that this cross represented their Sun god. And that is why
they recognised the missionaries who first arrived with their crosses as
messengers of their Sun god, without needing much explanation. But the
most powerful of all the crosses was the ‘perfect cross’ with all arms the
same length. This cross was sometime enclosed in a circle and used as a
powerful tool for all kinds of healing. But a perversion of this cross
which looks like an ‘X’, is deemed to be bad and ominous of unsavoury
events. When people have gone crazy, it is said that they have the (X)
cross on them.
Is it coincidental that this form of the cross was also the divine symbol
for Anu, the grand commander of the Anunnaki? And that it also
represented the ‘planet of the crossing’ which was Nibiru and portended
the coming of new medicine, a time of peace and prosperity and harmony
among the people of Earth? This would happen every 3,600 years and
every time Anu would descend from his ‘planet of the crossing’ while it
was in close proximity to Earth in its orbit. It seems that the symbolism
of the cross has played a very important role in our evolution as a species,without many of us being faintly aware of it. Just think of the symbol for
places of healing in our modern world, called a hospital. Or even the Red
Cross. They all go back a long way, and just like most elements of our
civilisation, we seem to have inherited them from the Sumerians.
It is appropriate that the story of Humankind begins and ends in the
cradle of humanity of southern Africa. And so we examine one last
statement from Credo Mutwa as he speaks about the Bantwana people,
meaning ‘children’. He tells us about a village of very shy and friendly
people living in seclusion along the Zambezi river, said to be among the
wisest people in the world. The peculiar thing about them is that virtually
all of them only have two large toes on each foot. They will tell you that
there are 24 inhabited planets within reach of Earth. They also believe
that they are the descendents of ‘bird-like’ people from the sky who came
to earth thousands of years ago from the ‘red star’ called ‘Liitolafisi’ and
had children with ‘earthling females’. We read the same story in
Sumerian tablets about the Igigi/Nefilim who came to Earth from Mars
and took human females as their wives. And let me remind you one last
time of the very same sentiment raised in Genesis 6:1-4:
“When men began to increase in number on the earth and daughters
were born to them, the sons of God saw that the daughters of men
were beautiful, and they married any of them they chose… The
Nephilim were on the earth in those days, and also afterward, when
the sons of God went to the daughters of men and had children by
them. They were the heroes of old, men of renown.”
This passage has troubled priests ever since it first appeared in the Bible.
There is no rational explanation for it, unless you offload everything you
have ever been taught and open your mind to new truths about the real
origins of Humankind. I hope you will experience the same sense of
liberation I did, when the pieces of the puzzle suddenly fell into place and
I could suddenly see how manipulated and brainwashed we had been for
too many years. The new truth is the only way forward for our enslaved
species to liberate ourselves from all the dogma that surrounds us, as we
edge closer to rejoining the Universal Community of Beings. After all,we came from the stars, and we will return to the stars.
Planets 10, 11 and 12, just waiting to be found.
Just a few days before going to print with this book, New Scientist
featured an article under the title ‘Far-Out Worlds, Just Waiting to be
Found’. Not only does this article provide my theories with great
scientific support, but it even shows a diagram of the distant planets in
our solar system, which very closely resembles the diagram in this book.
I will leave you with a few extracts from this article by Stuart Clark and
show the illustration as provided by New Scientist, 23 July 2005.
“In the dark reaches of the solar system lurk swarms of hidden
worlds. ‘It's quite possible that there is a halo of planets surrounding
our solar system, just waiting to be found,’ says Eugene Chiang, an
astronomer at the University of California, Berkeley. Chiang is not
the only one to think that the nine planets we know of are only half
the story. Alan Stern, a planetary astronomer at the Southwest
Research Institute in Boulder, Colorado, is convinced there are more
sizeable planets out there. ‘I think it is a 100 per cent certainty,’ he
says. ‘Definitely there are Earth-sized objects out there and some
will be larger than the Earth.’The halo, if it exists, would surround
the sun with planets orbiting at all sorts of crazy angles, at 1,000 or
even 10,000 astronomical units (AU) from the sun – that's up to
10,000 times the distance from the sun to Earth.
Just a decade ago, most astronomers had backed away from the idea of a
tenth planet beyond Pluto. Today's change of mind has come about thanks
to the latest fashionable theory to explain the creation of the solar
system: ‘oligarchic planet formation’. Adherence to this theory appears
to demand a second population of planets surrounding our solar system
(see diagram). Despite their size, the new planets are going to be tough to
find: ‘The hidden planets could be orbiting at all sorts of crazy angles
beyond Pluto.’
Zeljko Ivezic at the University of Washington in Seattle is confident thatLSST (telescope) will be up to the job. ‘A conservative estimate is that
we could detect Earth-sized planets at approximately 500 AU,’ he says.
‘I'm expecting planets 10, 11, 12 and many more to be found in the
distant outer solar system, all larger than Mars and possibly even than the
Earth.’ The planets thought to be the missing half of the solar system are
unlikely to have been thrown as far as the long-period comets. But they
are still going to be a long way out, anything between 25 to 250 times
further from the sun than Pluto.”
A copy of the illustration as presented by New Scientist, 23 July 2005.
The diagram indicates the orbits of the known planets close to the
sun, and predicts where the new planets will most likely be found in
the distant reaches of our solar system. This diagram bears an
uncanny resemblance to that which was described by the Sumerians
in their clay tablets over 4,000 years ago. It now seems that we will
find these ‘new’ planets in the not-so-distant future. When we do find
these planets, will we also find ‘our maker’?
ROUTE TO THE LAND OF OPHIR AND RICHES IN
GOLD
Since there is overwhelming evidence that Humankind originated in
Africa, it is fitting that we end this book in the place where it allstarted, southern Africa. There are various references about Enki
setting up his gold-mining stronghold near the gushing waters in the
Abzu. We know from the Sumerian tablets that Abzu was in southern
Africa. It is also here where the Great Zimbabwe ruins are situated.
Is it a coincidence that the origins of the Great Zimbabwe ruins have
not yet been explained? There is only one river with gushing waters in
this part of the world, the Great Zambezi River, which happens to be
VERY close to the ruins. Even today the gushing waters of the
Zambezi attracts thrill-seekers from all over the world for its
whitewater-rafting. We have shown conclusively that the Phoenicians
had a long standing history of visitations to southern Africa where
they must have obtained all their wealth in gold. The same can be said
for King Solomon, his gold mines and the land of Ophir, which has
mystified historians for many centuries. As an African I feel
compelled to share this knowledge about the wealth of the ancient
pre-history of this part of the world with you. The conclusions that I
have reached from my research surrounding this book points to only
one plausible theory. It is in southern Africa where humanity was
created. It is also here that the first gold in the world was mined and
extracted by the early settlers on planet Earth, using their genetically
created slave species.
The route which the Phoenicians and King Solomon took to
reach their golden riches.The End