CHAPTER 2
The Cell
Our human body is truly a miracle of creation. It clearly points to an
extraordinary event that led to our existence. Our bodies consist of
billions upon billions of cells which make up all the different parts of the
body: like heart cells, liver cells, muscle cells and so on. Inside the
nucleus of each cell is the genetic material that determines pretty much
everything about us from the moment we are conceived to the day we die.
Before we journey back in time to retrace the evolutionary steps of
humanity, let us take a quick look at those tiny things in our cells that
shape us, our genes and the genome. I think of them as the fingerprints of
God. This is where all the codes for our existence are kept and this is
where God with a capital ‘G’ played the omnipotent role when life in the
universe was created. I use this expression poetically and more for effect,
so don’t take it too literally, but rather inject your own theory of how the
universe was created. One of the pivotal questions I have been grappling
with for 30 years is ‘why do we age and why do we die?’. A question like
that may sound silly to most of us, as we have all been conditioned to
accept death as the inevitable. We always hear that the only thing we can
be sure of in life is that one day in the future we will die. What happens
after death is the question that man has been debating for eternity from a
multitude of angles and which we will attempt to answer by the end of
this book. I have however purposely steered clear of an extended spiritual
debate, rather focusing on the physical aspects of our being and how
those have evolved to shape our present state. Some will argue that it is
impossible to separate the spiritual from the physical but I hope to
demonstrate that it is the physical boundaries, predetermined by our DNA
at the point of conception, which ultimately dictate the pace or capacity
of our spiritual evolution. But even in this relatively primitive anddisease-prone state, our bodies are miracles of creation.
For those with biology or anatomy as a major, please humour me as I
bring the rest of the readers into the loop. To put things into perspective
on this cellular level, let us first take a quick look at the cell and its
contents as this will introduce a number of terms that will help you
understand some further explanations.
The CELL and its content:
The cell surface is covered with a plasma membrane and the contents
consist of the cytoplasm, which contains the various organelles including
the nucleus.
The plasma membrane controls flow of materials in and out of the cell,
either passively, which is called diffusion, or actively by active transport.
The surface is covered with vesicles or vacuoles, which are flask-like
invaginations of the membrane. It is thought that these provide a crucial
means for large molecules to be taken into and out of the cell.
The nucleus controls the cell and also contains the DNA (chromosomes
or genome), which in turn determines all of our characteristics. Elements
of these characteristics will be passed onto the next generation of
offspring because of the action of the DNA. This is called hereditary
transfer of DNA and it is why children take after their parents. One half
of the child’s DNA comes from its mother; the other half from its father.
The cytoplasm is the whole area between the cell wall and the nucleus,
where the metabolism and all the chemical reactions occur. The rate is
controlled by enzymes. But the secretion of enzymes is in turn controlled
by DNA.
The cytoplasm contains a number of organelles:
The Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) is an organised matrix of
• interconnected flattened parallel cavities. It is the intracellular
transport system.
Ribosomes are attached to the sides of the ER in some places, in which
case it is called the rough endoplasmic reticulum. Proteins are made
• here. Some of these proteins include enzymes and digestive hormones,
which are used by the cell, while some are secreted. The ER isolatesand transports the proteins, which have been made by the ribosomes.
The Golgi body is made up of smooth ER with no ribosomes. It is
thought to be involved in the making and transporting of lipids and
steroids. There are a number of vesicles nearby containing secretory
•
granules. It is thought that the Golgi apparatus is an assembly point
through which raw materials for secretion are funnelled before leaving
the cell.
The mitochondria is where respiration in the cell happens. The
mitochondria also generate all the energy for the cell. There is an
•
average of 1,000 of these per cell but there are many more in the motile
tail of the sperm cell.
Lysosomes contain enzymes for splitting complex chemical
• compounds into simpler sub units. They also destroy worn out
organelles or even the whole cell if needed.
• Chromatin is the genetic material within the nucleus.
But cells don’t just float around on their own throughout the body. Large
numbers of them are massed together to form organs and tissue. The
latest estimation is that there are around 50 - 100 billion cells in an
average human body, but this number changes all the time, every hour of
the day. It gets more complex, as bigger people have more cells than
smaller people and in the end no-one has a definite answer for the number
of cells in the human body. To demonstrate the complexity of this
estimate just imagine that your turnover of blood cells alone is about
eight million per second. When quantities like these are in question, it is
really hard to pin down an accurate number.
The cells that make up the many different parts of our anatomy all
originate from stem cells, which are formed shortly after fertilisation and
make up the early embryo. They divide and divide and slowly transform
into all the organs and cells that make up our entire anatomy. It's like a
factory that keeps on producing a large variety of end products. Every
single part of your body started out as a stem cell. Several months later,
the baby is born and unless it has a severe genetic defect it is perfectly
complete and ready to grow into an adult human. Its body appears to becomplete and ready for life but its genome is far from complete. Just like
its parents, the child bears a genome that will control all of its life
functions, but this genome is as incomplete as that of its parents who
collectively contributed to their offspring.
THE HUMAN CELL
I remember the day very vividly. It was 1975 and I was sitting in the
biology class at my high school in Randfontein, South Africa. Biology
was one of those subjects that seemed to always come naturally to me,
one of the lucky ones. The secret was to pay attention in class. It
dramatically reduced the amount of work I would have to do on my own
at home. The other trick was to ask as many questions as you could, to
anticipate what might come up in the exam. The teacher took forever to
draw the animal cell on the board and then stepped back to admire her
masterpiece. “Right…who knows what this is?” she asked with a
determined pride in her voice. She proceeded to explain all the different
parts of the cell, then moved on to the very curious fact that the cells
divide every few hours in some kinds of tissue and every few days in
others. The new cells are born and almost immediately proceed to prepare
for mitosis (cell division). This was almost too good to be true, I thought
to myself. This was a perfect formula for eternal life. When you add the
Krebs Cycle to the equation, the process through which energy is derivedfrom food in the cells to keep the body nourished, it seemed pretty clear
to me that the cells are the perfect structures to keep the body at peak
maturity and the achievement of eternal life should be a mere formality. I
raised my hand and asked the question that most probably changed the
way I think about life and death today: “So why do we die, if new cells
are born all the time and nourished by the food we eat?” I asked.
“We die because that is what happens,” she said. She went on to explain
that this process of mitosis seems to carry on for some time, for a number
of cycles or years and then suddenly the process starts to slow down.
Fewer cells are born, the cells grow older and fragile with weakened cell
walls, prone to pathogenic attack, until they stop dividing completely.
This process spreads throughout all the parts of the body until we
eventually die.
Somehow this explanation was not good enough for me and I felt that
the teacher was missing out on a very important part of the equation.
There had to be some sort of control mechanism, which should be and
could be manipulated to overcome this slowing down process in cell
division that ultimately leads to death. But in 1975 I knew absolutely
nothing about genetics and the teacher was not all that well informed
either. Ever since that day I have always believed that there must be a
simple procedure possible to reverse this ageing process. When genetics
became the cool new science by the late '80s, it all started to make a lot
of sense. Strangely enough, until the year 2004, scientists had still been at
odds about the causes of ageing. Some have still not reached the
seemingly obvious conclusion that just like all other anatomical and
physiological functions, ageing must also be controlled by the genome. It
is not only the cell as a whole that keeps multiplying, but all the parts of a
cell are constantly being built up and broken down throughout its
lifespan. The cell is constantly active and every bit is often renewed.
When certain parts or organelles are not needed, such as extra
mitochondria, they are simply disassembled and broken down to a
molecular level. The truth is that once cells are born, they are truly
perfect organisms that should continue to live by constantly dividing
themselves for as long as they are fed. This is a great question forphilosophers, since the original cell is now two cells and exists twice.
Like a magician at a kiddies' party with those long thin balloons, a twist
here and a twist there and soon the balloon has become two balloons. A
few more effortless manipulations and the cells have become a little
doggie or a rabbit or even a beating heart. That is the magic of the cells in
our bodies.
THE HUMAN CELL SHOWING THE DNA IN THE NUCLEUS
The last decade has seen some new theories on cell death and ageing
but to date no-one is sure why cells get fragile and ‘cranky’ as they get
older. One of the popular theories in the attempt to understand ageing is a
substance called ‘telomeres’. These protect the DNA from damage during
copying. It is thought that the telomeres on the ends of the genes get worn
away or damaged and when this happens it seems that the DNA can get
damaged too. This can lead to mutations and changes that lead to ageing
and cell death. This is however still one hypothesis with many others
doing the rounds and no-one can speak with absolute authority. So I willuse this hole in the fabric of science to postulate my own hypothesis in
later chapters. The damaged DNA then starts to send the wrong messages
or codes to the cell and its components, which leads to the secretion of
the wrong enzymes or chemicals, which leads to the cell not performing
at its peak and then it slowly shuts down and dies.
This is an important link to my argument in later chapters. All because
of messed up programming and incorrect triggering of genetic responses,
it is possible that the cells in our bodies die and we end up dying as a
logical consequence. So if messed up cellular genetic information leads
to diseases such as tumours and cancers and many other serious life
threatening conditions, could we assume that the correct genetic
information will do the opposite? Keep the cells alive forever? This is
where genetic engineers are focusing much of their attention. We have
made many breakthroughs in identifying various genes that control a vast
number of physiological activities and our success rate in gene therapy
and gene replacement is growing constantly. In a nutshell, by identifying
damaged genes we can take steps to replace them with healthy genes.
But what if we cannot do this in certain situations. What alternatives
do we have? Stem cells! The success rate we have witnessed by
introducing stem cells into damaged tissue has taken everyone by
surprise. While everyone was focused so fiercely on genetics, stem cell
research has exploded with astonishing results. By injecting stem cells
into damaged tissue, doctors have reconstituted hearts, livers and even
eyes. The recovery of the organs is almost like performing a miracle,
with the damaged tissue being regenerated within days or weeks. A man
who had only 10% active heart muscle left had recovered to 90% within
two weeks after receiving a stem cell injection into the damaged part of
the heart. This is why the debate over human cloning has become so
heated. Scientists have now realised that the stem cells in human embryos
can be used to cure all kinds of incurable diseases, produce new organs
and rejuvenate almost any part of our body. Embryonic stem cells first
appear about a week after fertilisation. They are the ‘parents’ of all other
cells in our body.
In theory, stem cells could be harvested from an early embryo, whichwas a cloned version of you, after which the embryo would be discarded.
Such deliberate wastage of embryos is one reason why therapeutic
cloning is so highly controversial. But the technique offers such
important life-saving treatments that its use is considered justified by
many people. Research into therapeutic cloning is allowed in the UK but
it is illegal to place any cloned human embryo into a womb. This was
intended to prevent anyone from trying to create a living clone.
But stem cells can also be found in adult bodies, where they provide
ongoing maintenance and repair. Adult stem cells appear to be partially
differentiated, which means they have already started moving towards
becoming a specific cell type. They do however show great flexibility.
Another possible source for stem cells is in the blood collected from a
baby’s umbilical cord just after birth. Some parents are choosing to
freeze and store this blood so their baby will be able to call on a supply of
its very own stem cells if it ever needs it later in life. I trust that scientists
all over the world are already busy trying to recreate stem cells in a tube
but the miracle of these cells lies embedded in the deep secrets of their
genome. Not until we start to unravel some of the ‘junk’ parts of the
genome and the secret encoding they possess will we start to fathom the
true mechanism of stem cells. So, now that we have uncovered a possible
miracle of life, let’s get back to the shortcomings of the incomplete
genetic structure lurking in our cells.
The Human Genome Project was launched in 1990 and its goal was to
decipher and map the entire DNA of a representative human, who was
selected from a group of anonymous donors. The cost? A phenomenal US
$3 billion! It has been called the biological equivalent of putting a man
on the moon. The results have taken humanity completely by surprise
every step of the way as the group of scientists continually made new
discoveries during the course of this process. The original estimate was
that the project would take about 20 years but thanks to the rapid
development of computer technology it only took them 10 years. In June
2000, it was announced that the entire human genome had been
sequenced. The sequence is a print-out of the structured order of four
chemicals found along the length of the DNA molecule. These chemicalsare referred to as letters A, T, C and G and there are an astonishing three
billion variations of them along our 23 chromosomes, forming a unique
sequence that holds the encoded programme for the growth of a specific
person. The hidden message in this code controls everything about us; it
points to our ancestry and predetermines our future. These are mainly the
instructions for building proteins and millions of other secret activities
that have not yet been discovered.
The big surprise to the scientists was that active genes make up only
tiny fractions of the entire genome. Incredibly, they only make up 3% of
the total DNA in our chromosomes. The genes are either alone or
clustered together in larger groups, but in between each gene sequence,
there are long stretches of DNA which do not appear to contain any type
of code for anything. These stretches have now been referred to by
scientists as ‘Junk’ DNA, mainly because they have not figured out what
secret message it conceals. This has sparked an interesting new debate
that will last until the true relevance of these dormant DNA sections is
explained. Fortunately the scientists had learnt from the arrogance of
their predecessors, and in their wisdom they decided to map the entire
Human Genome, including the ‘Junk’ just in case it might have as yet
undiscovered significance. It only took a few years to learn that those
‘Junk’ genes indeed played an important role in the structure of the
genome. It is now clear that the positioning of these sections of dormant
DNA are an integral part of the entire structure. More specific
information will emerge as time goes by.
It makes no sense at all that the single most important molecular
structure in our body, which is also the master control mechanism, would
be created incomplete or with defects. I suggest that at the point of
creation, the genome was originally created to be complete and fully
functional. But because it is neither complete nor fully functional, we
start to theorise about its true potential and our own full potential when
dictated to by the perfect genome. Every week scientists are discovering
new genes with specific control mechanisms over certain parts of our
body. Genes that control the colour of your eyes, your hair, your height,
the secretion of enzymes, your skin, your sex and even a gene thatsupposedly dictates whether you will be ‘straight’ or ‘gay’. For every
characteristic or function, there is a specific group of genes that controls
that specific part of our body. Before we are even born, while we are
growing in the womb, the genome starts to dictate how the master cells
should divide and how they should shape our unique being.
It seems that as our genome evolves, it allows us to evolve on two
levels. A physical level and a spiritual or mental level. It is very curious
that our evolution or development as a species seems to be linked to
technological discovery, scientific achievements and spiritual maturity.
The more we evolve, the more impressive our discoveries. And the more
complex the questions we seem to pose, the more challenging the goals
we set ourselves. Except for periods like the Dark Ages, when all
knowledge was seemingly lost and replaced by oppression, dictatorship
and savagery. It seems incredible that the knowledge of the universe, our
ability to build breathtaking structures like the pyramids, and broad-
minded philosophy all vanished, only to be replaced by an oppressed
society during those times. But once again we emerged as a striving
species and continued to ask more poignant questions about our origins,
discovering electricity, the atom and reaching for the stars. We have
theorised about travelling beyond the speed of light, time travel and even
meta-universes. We no longer seem so sure of our wisdom, we wonder
more curiously where we are heading, but… we still don’t know where
we come from. Is our insatiable need to reach the stars a clue to where we
might have come from? It is quite possibly so and we will examine
ancient evidence which seems to support this theory very persuasively.
We cannot place a limit on our mental and spiritual evolution. So if the
mental and physical are somehow linked, there should be no boundary to
our physical evolution too. Such physical evolution will not necessarily
be visible on the outside, but its effects will most certainly be felt on a
molecular and cellular level where the genome is most active.
Without most of us realising it or having the background knowledge to
comprehend the reasons, our bodies are continually striving for a
complete or ‘perfect genome’. One that has reactivated the seemingly
endless stretches of ‘Junk’ which line the DNA. This is the fundamentalprinciple of evolution. Our own genome is in a constant state of
evolution, a never-ending process of completing itself. Re-computing and
re-scanning its own structure and constantly filling in the missing bits.
The evolutionary process starts with the genome itself. Just like new
computer technology allows us to scan photographs and turn a dull image
into a perfectly sharp image, the genome is constantly fixing the dull,
inactive bits, unlocking them and reactivating them to perform the
specific function for which they were created. Just because the geneticists
have not yet figured out what all the dormant stretches of DNA are for,
does not mean that evolution is going to stand still and wait for us to
figure it out. Slowly but surely we are evolving physically and mentally,
as the genome reactivates itself. It is like a rebirth from a long sleep
which Humankind is waking up from. A sleep into which we must have
been induced by someone or something a long time ago. A sleep of
ignorance and forgetfulness. It is often said that less intelligent people
seem to be happy with their lot. They don’t question why, they just accept
their lot and get on with life without asking too many questions. They
place their lives in the hands of their god, whichever god it may be and
believe that one day their souls will be saved from the devil. It is truly a
great escape for many and a good enough reason to go on regardless. We
have however seen small increments of evolutionary evidence in our
physical and spiritual forms. The fact that our tonsils cause more trouble
than good; our appendixes are removed well before they can possibly kill
us by bursting and the fact that the average survival age in the global
population has increased dramatically since the Dark and Middle ages.
This may have something to do with socioeconomic circumstances, diet
and climate, but on the other hand it may not. For every bit of genetic
resurrection that occurs in our cells, our bodies and minds evolve in
harmony. More and more people around the world now refer to
themselves as ‘spiritual’ rather than religious. The past 2,000 years has
seen the emergence of countless new religions and more splinter cults, as
people are searching for new answers and opening themselves up to new
realities.
I predict that in time to come, as we unravel more of this DNAstructure, we will discover power and wisdom emanating from the
genome, the complexity of which we cannot comprehend today. But we
have the capacity to digest science fiction in large doses, so if this is a
little too much for you at this moment, just pretend that this is a little
science fiction trip and enjoy the ride.
Why would such a perfect part of creation like the DNA, consist of as
much as 97% of unintelligible junk? Surely God does not make mistakes!
Or is it possible that the inactive genes were purposely switched off,
somehow, by someone when modern humans were created, right at the
dawn of humanity? Could there have been some group of beings armed
with sufficient skill and knowledge, who consciously planned and
executed this procedure? They must have had a reason or motive to create
a being or possibly even a new species with a drastically stunted genome.
In the past two decades scientists have shown conclusively and
established with a relatively wide margin for error that both
mitochondrial Eve and chromosomal Adam were created between
180,000 to 250,000 years ago. Who would have had such knowledge of
genetics 250,000 years ago and what motive did they have to create a
lesser evolved and more primitive creature like the human? The answer
may be hidden in thousands of ancient texts that have gone unnoticed for
centuries. In her book ‘Private Lives of the Pharaohs’ Joyce Tyldesley
points out that 200 years ago, the early archaeologists were no more than
‘officially sanctioned treasure hunters’. They knew very little about the
science they were involved in, unable to read hieroglyphs or other ancient
texts, sometimes not even being able to distinguish between written text
and decorative art. Excavators were obsessed with finding giant
monumental pieces to impress funders and attract curious people to the
museums. The knowledge that was captured on thousands of clay tablets
was lost to Humankind for centuries, piled up in the basements of
museums of the world. No one could possibly imagine that the primitive
people of the ancient past could have had anything of consequence to say.
Those who believed such misconceptions would have had those beliefs
shattered.
For now, let us return to the possibility of a perfect genome and let usimagine for a moment what capabilities we may possess if our genetic
structure was complete and fully functional, if large parts of our genome
were not switched off. Let us examine some of the common problems in
our physical anomalies which we would overcome with our DNA intact.
The list is very long and touches every single aspect of our being. On this
list would be all forms of disease; cancer; the simple process of healing;
organ failure; mutation and the ability to adapt swiftly to severe external
conditions; eyesight; hearing; deformities and other physical
imperfections and obviously also ageing and death. These are just some
of the complex physical benefits Humankind will reap with a complete
genome. By logical deduction, there will be genes which control all these
characteristics in our bodies, and we will be able to manipulate these
genes in any way we choose to. Curiously enough, I have mentioned the
topics which have already received much attention from scientists. Have
you ever tried to catch an ordinary garden lizard and its tail comes off in
your fingers? Or while you dig a hole for the plant you received as a
present from your mother, and you accidentally chop an earthworm in
half? Well, the lizard’s tail will grow back rather quickly and the worm
will not die, it will grow to its full size again. The fact that such primitive
creatures have the capacity to re-grow lost limbs or other vital parts of
their anatomy, should unquestionably allow us, a far more advanced
species, to do the same, if we could only reactivate certain parts of our
genome. The other, more complicated characteristics deal with the
spiritual and mental parts of our psyche. The concept of being born with
all the memories and knowledge of our parents has been debated for
decades. The power to interact with others through ESP or reading
someone’s thoughts have been touted as a function of higher evolved
beings. Thought materialisation and teleportation linked to the
materialisation of the physical around the spiritual, would allow us to
travel though time and the universe. In a nutshell, we would become
super-humans who live forever. But this kind of evolved state of
existence will have certain prerequisites. The physical and the spiritual
parts must evolve in tandem and in perfect harmony with each other. The
one cannot overtake the other. A kind of ‘yin yang’ coexistence betweenphysical and spiritual needs to be accomplished. If the one should evolve
faster or slower than the other, we will have an imbalance between the
two characteristics, which will manifest in a variety of unpredictable
effects, behavioural patterns of instability, violent and dramatic
antisocial behaviour, and who knows what else. In fact, it is exactly the
kind of behaviour we have grown accustomed to on this planet. This must
be the reason why we as a species are so volatile. The reason for our
instability can be ascribed to the turbulent clash of our current disparate
pace of evolution between the physical and spiritual parts of our being.
The fact that some people may be evolving faster than others is a possible
cause for conflict, aggression and misunderstanding.
The fact that our genome is evolving towards a complete genome could
also be evident from the way in which our bodies cope with certain
diseases, which in the past would have killed us and yet today are
controlled by our boosted immune system. On the spiritual side it is
heralded by the more complex questions we ask about our origins, God
and the universe. With the advances in astronomy we marvel at the
vastness of the universe and many people are coming to terms with the
fact that we may not be the only intelligent life out there. In 1990,
astronomers were still of the opinion that planets were not commonly
distributed in the universe. A few years later, after some more startling
discoveries, they estimated that a small fraction of the stars may have
some planets that formed around them during their own birth. And only a
few years later they reached the conclusion that the formation of planets
and the existence of solar systems is an integral part of what happens
when Nebulae give birth to new stars and galaxies. Suddenly, filled with
this new wisdom, astronomers started discovering many new solar
systems with planets and they continue to do so today.
When Fred Hoyle and Chandra Wickramasinghe reintroduced the
ancient Greek concept of Panspermia in the early '70s, and suggested that
life arrived here on Earth from space, as it probably did on countless
other planets in the universe, most of us were unaware of other planets,
and this theory was laughed off as ludicrous by most scholars. Today,
Panspermia is accepted by the majority of scholars. These two celebratedscientists have proved beyond any doubt that life has in the past arrived
on Earth from space and still does so every day, in the form of viruses,
bacteria, spores and other microscopic organisms. While these may have
played the leading role in the origin of life on Earth some 3,5 billion
years ago, they also played a pivotal part in the great leaps of evolution of
species. Furthermore, Fred Hoyle has presented evidence which supports
the theory of evolution happening in jumps, as opposed to the great
Darwinian propaganda that ‘evolution does not happen in jumps’. So
what has this got to do with our quest for our own identity? …
Everything!
It holds up the argument that Humankind is not the final link of an
evolutionary process which started with so-called ‘apes’, and grew into
primitive hominids, who in turn grew into intelligent humans. It goes a
long way in supporting the argument that the ‘Adam’ or first man was
created by a conscious act of medical science some 200,000 years ago.
This has been supported by tracking the Y chromosome in the male
population and arriving at a similar date. Is it a coincidence that this
scientifically determined prehistoric date is in turn supported by the 1994
announcement by scientists, that tracing mitochondrial DNA in females,
has placed the first ‘Eve’ around the same time? These scientific
discoveries have gone a long way in supporting the evidence which
suggests that Adam was created and when he was lonely, a female partner
was created for him from his ‘essence’. It sounds like a great fairytale
which we read in the Bible, but it is also written exactly like this in
Sumerian clay tablets, which predate the Bible by as much as 3,000 years.
So where did the authors of the Bible get all their inspiration from? As
we unravel the ancient times of Humankind, we will expose the origins of
many of the stories from the Old Testament, clearly captured for eternity
on thousands of cuneiform clay tablets, long before a single word of the
Bible was first jotted down. Furthermore, we are able to draw such
conclusions and begin to make sense of it all, because of the incredible
discoveries in biological science that have exposed the power of the
DNA, all held together in the human cell.