CHAPTER 3
The Brain
So what is this thing called a brain? A lump of gross-looking soft
tissue tightly squeezed into our skulls, which allows us to formulate
thoughts, contemplate our own being and question our consciousness. We
use it to be witty, to bamboozle people, to reason with others and a
million other functions that are often too small for us to notice. We abuse
it with drugs and alcohol, pushing the limits of our brains to what seems
to be the edge at times. The brain is a very fragile organ and that is why it
is so well protected by the skull. But the brain also punishes us for
abusing our bodies. It gives us headaches and causes us to feel pain of a
wide variety. It can even cause us emotional pain when there is no sign of
physical trauma. The brain can send mixed messages and cause us to hear
voices, imagine demons and drive us to insanity.
The brain is by far the most complex and mysterious organ in our
bodies. It is the ultimate marvel of our creation. It has intrigued doctors
and scientists for centuries and will possibly continue to do so for
centuries more. Unlike the genome, the brain’s activity is impossible to
map. The truth is that we know very little about the brain and how it
works. Oh, we know all about the chemicals and enzymes involved, what
triggers what and where, and what the final effect is, but this is just the
visible chain reaction that is easy to follow. What we cannot explain, are
the invisible bits. What actually happens in the brain in between the
stimulus and response which allows us to formulate an argument or burst
into tears, or feel pity and remorse, or such anger that we respond with
violence.
Neuroscientists have spent the past few decades studying the brain’s
anatomy, function, physiology, biochemistry and molecular biology, but
all that this research has amounted to, is to highlight how little we knowabout this mysterious organ. Intelligence has always been ascribed to the
size of the brain in species. That is why we are said to be the smartest or
most evolved species on Earth. And yet, whales have larger brains than
humans, so where does that leave them?
Here is a short list of animals, comparing their brain size in grams. It
must surely force us to reconsider the idea of ‘larger is smarter’ or is
there something more to the bigger brains of several species on Earth?
Average Brain Weight in Grams
Grams
Grams
Adult human
1,300 - 1,400 Newborn human 350 - 400
Sperm whale
7,800
Fin whale
6,930
Elephant
6,000
Humpback whale 4,675
Gray whale
4,317
Killer whale
5,620
Bowhead whale
2,738
Pilot whale
2,670
Bottle-nosed dolphin 1,500 - 1,600 Walrus
1,020 - 1,126
Pithecanthropus Man 850 - 1,000 Camel
762
Giraffe
680
Hippopotamus
582
Leopard seal
542
Horse
532
Polar bear
498
Gorilla
465 - 540
Cow
425 - 458
Chimpanzee
420
Orang-utan
370
California sea lion 363
Manatee
360
Tiger
263.5
Lion
240
Grizzly bear
234
Sheep
140
Baboon
137
Source: faculty.washington.edu
Based on the above information, the Bottle-nosed dolphin should be
slightly more intelligent than humans, while elephants and whales should
be infinitely smarter. For all we know, maybe they are. But for now there
are still some countries in the world who allow the barbaric hunting andkilling of these highly evolved species. The brain and its major extension,
called the medulla oblongata, can be described as a mass of
interconnected nerve cells that control all the activities of the entire
central nervous system. Between these two structures they control all the
voluntary and involuntary activities in our bodies. Involuntary activity
would be respiration, heart rate, blood pressure, muscle activity and all
the goings-on in the digestive tract, just to name a few. Voluntary activity
is basically every movement or action we engage in by first thinking
about it and then doing it. Some of these may seem like involuntary
reactions, because our muscles are trained to perform the tasks, like
walking, talking or even typing. But there are millions more activities
that fall into both the voluntary and involuntary categories. It is estimated
that the communication network in your brain can perform several billion
connections and calculations per second. There are a number of major
players in this network. Neurons or brain cells, which carry the nerve
impulses rapidly between the point of stimulation and the affected organ;
the neurotransmitter, which allows the message between neurons and
organs to be transmitted, and receptors or receptor cells, which receive
the message at the site of the affected organ, like the eye.
There are around 100 billion neurons in the brain but there are also an
estimated 10 - 50 times as many glial cells in the brain. These perform
some sort of supportive and possibly nutritive function to the neurons but
their true function is yet unknown. The total estimated length of nerve
fibres in the brain is around 160,000 kilometres. To get an idea of how
incredibly complex the brain and its entire central nervous system really
is, just look at the eye. It sits very closely located to the brain with a five
centimetre long optic nerve. In this nerve there are 1.2 million fibres that
send and receive messages between the brain and the eye on a constant
basis. Even when we sleep the brain controls the eyes through REM or
rapid eye movement activity. If you ever have doubts about a supreme
creator God, who masterminded all this stuff in the universe, the brain is
a good place to start. It is truly the master organ of our anatomy. But the
brain also controls activities that are often described as spiritual and are
more mysterious by nature, like consciousness, thought, reason, emotion,love, purpose, passion and more. These are the properties of the brain
which will challenge us until we are evolved enough to understand them.
But for now, we just speculate.
Someone, somewhere at some stage in the past made a careless
statement, that we only use 10% of our brains. The media immediately
jumped on it and the lie has been immortalised in pop-science, pulp-
fiction articles ever since. But there are a number of interesting examples
to keep the theory alive. I must draw attention to the subtle difference in
such claims, by scholars who approach it from the point that the brain’s
potential is infinite. Their statements are therefore merely expressions of
support for the ‘infinite brain’concept.
NEURON
The possibility that the human is only 10% functional, at best, was
outlined by Australian neurology Nobel laureate sir John Eccles. But as I
mentioned, his statements came from the assumption that 'the brain
indicates its powers are endless'.
Another scientist called John Lorber performed a number of autopsies
in England on hydrocephalics. This condition basically causes large parts
of brain tissue to be dissolved by acidic spinal fluid. He tested the IQs of
patients before and during the disease. His findings showed that IQ
remained constant up to death, even though more than 90% of brain
tissue was destroyed by the disease. It had no impact on what is
considered to be normal intelligence.
In Russia, a neurosurgeon called Alexandre Luria, showed that the bulk
of frontal lobes are mostly dormant, when he physically proceeded to cut
out large parts of frontal lobes from humans. He also gave themphysiological and psychological tests, before and after cutting out parts,
and he even went as far as removing entire frontal lobes from patients.
His conclusion was, that while it had some effect on mood patterns, it
caused no major change in brain function. I believe that experiments like
these most likely had a lot to do with the ‘10% brain activity’mania.
In higher mammals there are large parts of the brain which seem to be
associated with intelligence, personality and higher mental activity.
Neuroscientists have developed a number of imaging techniques to study
the activity inside the brain, like positron emission tomography (PET),
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computerised tomography (CT).
CT uses X-rays to discern normal brain geography from tumours and
other abnormalities, while MRI reveals brain structure by detecting radio
waves that are deflected by tissues in a strong magnetic field; and PET
detects gamma rays emitted by radioactively-labelled chemicals as they
rush to active sites in the brain. Another technique, which is known as
magneto encephalography, involves measuring the magnetic currents that
are generated by the electrical impulses in the brain. All of the different
approaches to imaging in the brain give us some insight into brain
activity and functionality, but it leaves humans far short of understanding
the true complexity of this organ.
Many tests have been done trying to determine how much of the brain
we actually use but scholars seem to differ on this estimation. Some say
that we use about 10% of our brain, some are as bold as saying that we
use up to 20%, but the more cautious ones claim that 3-4% is much closer
to the probable truth. There seems to be no specific scientific finding or
origin for any of these statements. This sudden interest in the capacity of
the brain may have originally been stimulated when scientists performed
basic experiments with rats, and found that rats could perform most of
their normal functions with as little as 2% of their cerebral cortex intact.
Various extrapolations of these statements may have caused this brain
usage debate, which was mainly fuelled by the media and others who
wanted to capitalise on such disinformation. The truth is, we probably use
all of our brain. This has been illustrated by many of the previously
mentioned imaging techniques over the years. Neuroscientists have nowpretty much mapped the anatomy of the brain and identified the functions
of each section. Upon examining the map of the brain, you will realise
that we know which part of the brain is responsible for various functions
and there is not much brain left, which could be called idle. But the fact
is, although it seems that the whole brain is active in countless stimuli
and responses, there is no scientific way in which we can measure the
amount of brain we use. At the same time, there is also no method to
date, which can measure the full capacity of the brain. So we should
rather be asking what the capacity of the brain is, instead of how much of
the brain we actually use.
The two approaches are philosophically opposed. The one approach
assumes that the brain capacity is finite and aims to measure the current
usage, while the other suggests that our brain capacity could be infinite.
Many scientists claim that nutrition plays a key role in the
performance and possibly evolution of the brain. Much has been written
about healthy diets with very specific dietary instructions to help certain
conditions. While diet and nutrients undoubtedly play a crucial role in the
health and smooth performance of the brain, it is impossible to claim any
long term evolutionary benefits from such treatment. It would be
equivalent to saying that a daily moisturising regime will make you
immortal. The one thing that many scientists seem to agree on, is that
around 200,000 years ago, the human brain underwent a dramatic
evolutionary change. Various theories for this sudden increase in brain
size and intelligence have had scientists guessing and speculating for
years. The popular theory doing the rounds is one of high seafood intake.THE HUMAN BRAIN
The different functions of the left brain and the right brain have been well
documented. Here are some examples:
Left Brain Functions Right Brain Functions
Written language
Insight
Number skills
3-D forms
Reasoning
Art awareness
Spoken language
Imagination
Scientific skills
Music awareness
Right-hand control Left-hand control
Let’s take a quick look inside the brain and at some crucial statistics:
The brain is involved in everything you do, either voluntarily or
involuntarily. As was pointed out before, some of the involuntary
activities that are controlled by the brain are your heartbeat, breathing
and coughing, or better described as all the things that need to continue
functioning while you sleep. The voluntary activities are all the things
you do consciously, like walking, writing, talking, smiling.
When your brain functions properly, you function properly as a well-
synchronised unit. But when your brain hits a few bumps it can manifest
itself in a multitude of unwanted side effects. The brain is active from the
moment you are born to the day you kick the bucket. If it had to shut
down for even a second, all the involuntary functions in your body wouldshut down too. Something as simple as breathing or your heart beat,
would basically put an end to you if your brain had to stop functioning.
And because the brain is so active and never stops, it consumes about 20-
30% of the body’s energy. To achieve such a high consumption of blood,
it is serviced by about 400 miles of capillaries delivering a constant
supply of oxygen, glucose and other nutrients. So if you want to lose
weight you have to think harder. There are about 100 billion neurons or
nerve cells in the brain. Alcohol and drugs destroy these cells by the
millions. They do grow back however. Each neuron or nerve cell is
connected to other nerve cells in the brain, by hundreds or even thousands
of connections, called dendrites. It is estimated that there are over
1,000,000,000,000,000 (Ten to the power of fourteen, 10 14) connections
in the brain, more connections than there are stars in the Milky Way. The
brain is more complicated than any computer we can imagine. The reason
we can make such a silly comparison, is because we now know that the
brain’s capacity is infinite.
A single neuron can produce almost a tenth of a volt electrical charge,
and the total electrical activity in your brain can easily be measured with
an electroencephalogram (EEG). This allows us to actually measure brain
activity and test the activity under various stimuli. Just like the other
cells in your body, the brain cells also start to decline and die after a
certain period. The receptors also decline with age. The neurotransmitter
serotonin interacts with at least 15 different receptors in the body but
after the age of about 20, one of serotonin’s most common receptors
starts to decline and vanishes from the human brain at about 15% per
decade, which may be why depression commonly appears in middle-age.
Scientists believe that humans underwent a major brain change around
200,000 years ago. What could have caused the sudden and dramatic
change in human brains? The suggestion that a high seafood diet was the
cause of this sudden change is silly and makes no scientific sense at all.
There had to be a more dramatic event that caused such a major change in
the brains of our ancestors. There is emerging evidence supported by
genetic and mitochondrial dating, which seems to point to such adramatic event. It seems that scientists in all fields of expertise are
constantly providing us with more evidence of our human ancestry, but
most of us are totally oblivious to the evidence that surrounds us. Keep in
mind that the coincidental facts of mitochondrial Eve and chromosomal
Adam were both dated back to around 200,000 years ago. Just a
coincidence, or another piece of the human puzzle that fits perfectly?
Those scientists who ascribe this sudden brain change to dietary habits of
the ancient Homo sapiens, are saying that those who ate more seafood
evolved bigger brains over millions of years. They compare the small
brains of inland Australopithecus some 2 million years ago, to Homo
sapiens some 200,000 years ago. Can you see the problem here? These
changes in brain size happened suddenly, as if overnight. They are more
easily explained by genetic manipulation than gradual evolution due to
high fish consumption. Besides, the two species have no connection in
their evolutionary lines anyway. This kind of theory is a clear indication
of how resistant some sectors of the scientific fraternity are to new
discoveries that challenge the conventional way of thinking. Homo
habilis (handy man) was the first of the genus Homo, who lived between
2.2 and 1.6 million years ago, with an average brain size of 500 - 750 ml.
The next in line was Homo erectus, around 2 million - 400,000 years ago,
with a brain capacity of 800 - 900 ml. Then suddenly around 200,000
years ago, a new species appears out of the blue with a brain 55% bigger.
This calls for some serious investigation, since Darwin believes that
evolution does not happen in jumps. How is it possible that such a species
could miraculously appear; be able to think; able to reason and able to
calculate? There must be more plausible theories for this phenomenon.
Scientists go on trying to substantiate their big-brain theory by
comparing the high fish intake of humans some 28,000 years ago in
central Europe. Neanderthals had a low seafood intake surviving mostly
on meat from inland animals, and this is why they were outlived by Homo
sapiens, who had a high Omega-3 and Omega-6 fatty acid intake. The
crucial mistake they make here, is that fossilised evidence has clearly
shown that Homo neanderthalensis had a larger brain than Homo sapiens,
by between 5% to 10%. Scientists have also proved that a high seafoodintake dramatically reduces the levels of depression among its
population. North American and European populations showed a rate of
depression 10 times greater than a Taiwanese population who consumed a
lot of fish. The Japanese, whose diet is also rich in fish, have a
significantly lower incidence of depression compared to North Americans
and Europeans. Once again, these are simply cosmetic reactions by the
brain which will have no effect on how the genome has been
programmed. This theory will need more evidence which points to DNA
restructuring or some form of evolution to make it stick. Putting make-up
on your face will not keep you immortal.
So while it may be true that fats build your brain, and proteins unite it,
carbohydrates fuel the brain, and micronutrients defend it, the real
miracle lies in the fact that your DNA planted the programmed code at
your point of conception, which allowed your brain to grow into its fully
functional form. As incredible an organ as the brain may be, it is
ultimately controlled by the genome, just like every other minute aspect
of our being.
It does seem that the brain may have a limitless capacity for higher
functions not yet understood by humans. A variety of unexplained
psychic abilities have been demonstrated by large numbers of
individuals. These are more often than not looked upon as ‘freaks of
nature’and not regarded as a possible higher state of evolution which
needs closer attention. We can look at the brain as the ‘interface’ between
the physical and the spiritual; our body and our soul. Somehow, some
individuals have mastered these higher brain activities without knowing
how and why. This adds another mysterious element to the Great Human
Puzzle. How and why have some people cultivated ESP skills? It makes
complete sense to me that while the genome is evolving towards its own
completion, it keeps unlocking parts of our brain, allowing us to perform
higher mental functions.
So if the brain is indeed the physical ‘interface’between body and
spirit, it will take a lot more evolution on our behalf to understand it.
Remember, the genome and the spirit cannot evolve at individual speeds.
So while the genome controls the rate of evolution of the brain, it is thenby default also the genome that ultimately dictates the pace at which the
soul is allowed to evolve while trapped in our human body. Like the laws
of osmosis, where the two concentrations on either side of the membrane
will eventually reach a state of equilibrium, but only if the membrane is
permeable and allows these to cross. Our DNA will allow the spirit in our
bodies to mix with the greater spirit in the universe, in bite-size chunks,
as we evolve and as we learn to deal with our newfound knowledge.
All this strange activity in the ancient past that caused our brains to
suddenly expand, goes a long way to substantiate that there must have
been some kind of genetic manipulation involved. The kind of
manipulation which was revealed to us in ancient clay tablets written
somewhere between 4,000 and 6,000 years ago. This new emerging
information has found favour with only a handful of broad thinkers.
Many archaeologists, historians and anthropologists are very nervous
about dealing with such sudden leaps in philosophy. But I hope to show
you a steady, cohesive trail of evidence that points to the placement of an
advanced race of beings, right here on Earth at the time when our brains
had so miraculously expanded. Not only did they leave behind written
evidence of their genetic manipulation, but they actually explain in great
detail the reasons why they needed to create a ‘primitive worker’on this
planet.
Just think about how many times people say to you ‘I don’t know if I
want to hear that… it sounds too horrendous’. That is really an honest
admission that they are not ready to receive certain information. When it
comes to new truths regarding our origins and spirituality, people are not
that polite about it. The majority of the world’s population is not yet
ready to face these new emerging facts, even if they were asked to
contemplate them only as a theory to begin with. On the contrary, most
people will reject any such utterances with high levels of contempt. After
all, they know exactly where they come from and who their god is,
clearly displaying the power of our pre-programmed genome to keep
humanity obedient and fearful of their maker.
So what have we learnt in this chapter? That the brain is an infinitely
complex organ with a capacity for processing knowledge and informationthat goes way beyond our imagination. All the mystique around the brain
raises the possibility that it is an interface between the physical and the
spiritual worlds. Regardless of its complexity, the programme for its
development comes from the genome. Around 200,000 years ago the
brain underwent a dramatic increase in size, just about at the time when
the Anunnaki created ‘Adamu’ according to the Sumerian tablets. The
sudden increase in the Homo sapiens brain could not have occurred due to
millions of years seafood consumption. The human race uses only a
fraction of its brain, which is strictly controlled by our genome. All this
leads to some crucial questions to close this chapter with. What will our
mental and spiritual capacity be when our genome has fully evolved?
Who were the Anunnaki? Why and how did they create Humankind?