CHAPTER 4
A Journey Back in Time
If we don’t know where we come from, how can we possibly know
where we are going? So in this chapter we will attempt to find pointers in
both directions. We need to dig deep into our prehistory before we start
gazing far into the future. Fortunately we have been handed loads of
knowledge by our advanced ancestors. Information that paints a very
clear picture of exactly who we are and where we are heading as a
species. All of this is possible because of hereditary DNA transfer,
combined with thousands of clay tablets filled with historic entries which
have been treated either as mythology or the mutterings of primitive folk
with nothing better to do.
So at the risk of becoming repetitive, let me remind you that to know
where we are going, we need to know where we come from. To start our
journey back in time, we need to retrace the steps of modern humans and
use all the resources available, including knowledge and information
from prehistoric scriptures, which may have previously been dismissed as
garbage. The Sumerian tablets have been a fascinating revelation and a
source of mysterious knowledge. So little is known about prehistory,
about the time before time, that when new dramatic evidence rises to the
surface, it can sound so fantastical to us modern humans in the 21st
century, that we refuse to accept it. We all talk about Greek and Roman
mythology, we know their gods and we even know their designations;
Venus, Pluto, Mercury, Isis, Thor, Apollo and the all-powerful Zeus, just
to remind you of a few. But were these just fairy tale heroes from ancient
times or were they really beings with superior powers? The Sumerian
tablets tell us that these were real gods and not imaginary names for
forces of nature. The names might have changed from civilisation to
civilisation, but their influence has shaped all of humanity to date.Just when I sat down to start writing this chapter, I had visitors who
popped in on a Saturday afternoon. We relaxed with a chilled glass of
wine by the pool and the subject of evolution and our ancestry came up. I
asked my friends what they thought of evolution, and what they know
about our ancient prehistory, and how and when we became human. Jana,
immediately expressed her understanding that we became human when
we jumped out of the trees and started walking upright. Clearly not an
opinion based on any levels of credible research, and yet, probably a very
similar perception shared by many others who have had the misfortune of
being brainwashed by the modern education system. Anton, on the other
hand, was a bit more reserved and unsure of the answers, but he was sure
that the evolutionist had got it right and that we evolved from some sort
of ape-like species over millions of years.
From these and numerous other discussions I’ve had over a period of
15 years, it seems that there are still two main theories which captivate
the minds of modern humans. The ‘evolution path’ and the ‘creation
path’. I have personally grappled with the conflict between the two for
nearly two decades, only to discover that there is a third possibility! One
which may possibly satisfy the fanatical beliefs of both sides, while
opening their eyes to new realities that have emerged out of our ancient
past.
While new discoveries and evidence are continually being presented, it
keeps moving the finish line. Every time some smart person postulates
the latest unassailable argument supported by remarkable evidence, it just
stimulates more debate and controversy which inevitably leads to more
discoveries and more debate. It is truly a great journey of discovery
which no person should lay claim to hastily. Scientists and
anthropologists will continue to differ on this subject for years to come,
but I do feel a convergence of the two doctrines is unavoidable. Just
recently I heard a priest talk about how he would welcome any alien
species as the miracle of God’s creation. He made a clear point of
differing with previous religious dogma, which places man at the centre
of creation, god’s great masterpiece, and as the pinnacle of intelligence
and master of the beasts.It is impossible to argue against evolution as it has been presented to
us over the past 150 years. We are surrounded by evidence everywhere
which supports evolution in the animal world and in the plant world. This
is not the challenge I am raising in this book. My struggle lies with the
last few hundred thousand years on this planet which saw the emergence
of humanity and the disappearance of the hominid creature who preceded
us.
I need to quickly draw a link between the words ‘Humankind’ and
‘humanity’. I present that you cannot have humanity without humankind
and therefore the two are inextricably linked, with subtle differences in
our personal interpretation. So I purposely use the two randomly to
illustrate this simple relationship. Evolution has played an important role
in how the two have entwined as man has evolved. There are however
some fascinating shortcomings in the Darwinian theory which have
already been attacked endlessly by much smarter people than me.
It does seem that Darwin may not have had it all correct. Darwin
actually borrowed much of his doctrine from many other scientists and
brilliant people before him, sometimes seemingly distorting the theories
to support his own. I trust that if he had lived today, he would most likely
change his mind dramatically about his ‘natural selection’ theory based
on the new evidence available.
It was not actually Charles Darwin who first coined the phrase ‘natural
selection’, when he published his controversial ‘bible’ on evolution in
1859, called On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or
the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life . It was
another biologist by the name of Patrick Matthew in 1831, who referred
to the “natural process of selection”. He saw it as a more descriptive term
than ‘the feedback idea’ which was used leading up to that point. Natural
selection was described as 'the properties which best permit particular
individuals possessing them to survive and reproduce their own genetic
variants, will increase from generation to generation, more in proportion
than other individuals with less beneficial genetic structures'. In a
nutshell, what this really means is ‘the survival of the fittest’. There was
another concept which Darwin seems to have borrowed; the analogy ofthe branching tree of life, which was described by Alfred Russel Wallace
in 1855.
One of the very strong points which Darwin makes is that evolution
does not happen in ‘jumps’. It took about 120 years for Fred Hoyle and
Chandra Wickramasinghe to show that evolution does happen in jumps
with the help of viruses and bacteria that arrive on Earth from space in a
process called Panspermia. These new arrivals from space constantly
mutate, infect the cells of plants and creatures and quite quickly cause
dramatic changes in the DNA structure of the host.
To demonstrate this outlandish proposition very basically, I would like
you to take your mind back to your school classroom wall. Picture the
poster with the chronological stages of human evolution. The ape-like
creature on the left; the slightly taller ape-like creature to its right with
less hair; and a slightly taller and more upright ape-man to its right with
even less hair; eventually we end up with a handsome man on the extreme
right representing modern humans, as the pinnacle of evolution. From ape
to human, just like that. They show us these simplistic illustrations which
leave children with preconceived ideas that this evolution thing is pretty
well documented and understood. They do not tell the children that this is
just one hypothesis of how we became human. There is a deafening
silence from the anthropologists about what exactly happened in the gaps
between the different stages of evolution. We would be wiser to teach our
children the full truth instead of the sweetened half-truth. There are giant
jumps of evolution between every creature on the evolution poster. How
is that possible? What happened to the thousands of evolutionary steps
between every stage? Or, did the creature on the left live for millions of
years, when suddenly it gave birth to a creature which looked nothing like
it? What could have sparked such a dramatic change? Clearly it was a
genetically driven change, but what would have caused such a dramatic
genetic deviation so quickly, when it was happy in its previous form for
millennia?
At the end of the 18th century, James Hutton felt unhappy with the
concept of gradual evolution when relating it to the geological activity onEarth and the principles of uniformity in geology. He stated that “The
processes at work on and inside the Earth have been operating in the same
general way throughout geological history. The overall environment has
remained broadly the same for 500 million years, while life has changed
dramatically from simple neurological beginnings, to highly complex
present day forms. How could this measure of change come about in a
broadly unchanging environment, if species were always optimised to
their maximum extent?”.
Since the unearthing of ‘Lucy’ and ‘Mrs. Ples’, the ‘Taung skull’ and
the ‘Turkana boy’, which were all landmarks in the field of archaeology,
thousands upon thousands of fossil skeletons of hominids and other
human ancestors or relatives have been found. Just when we think we
have a clear picture of how humans evolved, and a better understanding
of the great apes that lived alongside them, we are faced with a new
discovery which forces us to rethink some of the fundamentals. Just
recently, two major discoveries shook our views quite dramatically. In
September 2003 ‘Ebu’ was unearthed in a cave on the Indonesian island
of Flores. Standing at only about 1 metre tall, she is the smallest adult
hominid known. It is estimated that Ebu lived from around 95,000 years
ago until as recently as 13,000 years ago. This was the first time we
actually realised that we were not alone on this planet until relatively
recently, but shared it with people from another species! Because Ebu
was not a simple Homo sapiens, she was apparently human.
Another discovery was made about the great ape family, in Spain
during 2005, near Barcelona. Salvador Maya-Sola and Miquel Crusafont
unearthed a fossilised skull and partial skeleton of a great ape,
Pierolapithecus catalaunicus. This great ape is thought to have lived in
the Middle Miocene period between 12 and 13.5 million years ago, when
the great apes which include gorillas, chimpanzees and humans, split
from the lesser apes like gibbons and siamangs. Although it is possible
that this was the ancestor of the great apes, the major difference is that
this great ape could not swing through the trees. I mention these
examples of very recent discoveries to prove the simple point, that the
more we seem to think we know, the more surprises we receive to remindus that we know very little. We should keep an open mind at all times and
realise that while we evolve as humans, our evolving genome forces us to
ask more complex questions and discover even more staggering answers.
Let us now take a journey into our human past to realise how young
and fragile our species is and how little time we have spent on this Earth.
This is an important journey we need to take, to place the argument
between creation and evolution squarely on the table. Armed with this
knowledge, we will postulate a new combination of the two theories,
which will offend neither those who believe that God made all life on
Earth, nor the evolutionists who cling onto the Darwinian doctrine of
natural selection. We will however need to stress the important
differences between ‘God’ & ‘god’. A little technicality with universal
implications, which seems to have evaded the attention of humanity for
millennia.
The modern Olympics return to Greece where it started in
2004
•
- 1896, displaying the human struggle to hold onto peace,
AD
camaraderie and fair competition.
1903
Wilbur and Orville Wright make the first claim to have flown
•
-
AD
a heavier than air machine - the aeroplane.
1452
Leonardo da Vinci is born to become the central and most
•
-
AD
influential figure of the Renaissance period.
Muhammad was born in Mecca. Inspired by the Jewish and
Christian monotheism, he went on to recite the Koran which
• 570 AD - was inspired by the angel Gabriel. This book united the
Muslims under the principles of Islam and gave birth to the
youngest of the world’s great religions.
This actual date is debatable. Birth of Christ, the start of the
modern calendar. Jesus Christ introduced a revolutionary new
philosophy of love and peace among humanity. This was a
dramatic break from the Old Testament of the Bible and he
was seen as the ‘Messiah’ by some and a traitor by others.
Jesus was probably the most influential and the most
controversial human to have walked the Earth. His gospel• Year 0 - inspired prophets, kings and presidents, but it was also abused
as a symbol of power by dictators and religious groups even
before he was born and this abuse is still continuing today.
The debate goes on: Was he the son of God in the body of a
man, or just a prophet who was pushed by the needs of the
people of the day? Or maybe he was someone with ‘special’
powers in a place and time when humanity needed a new
direction and a message of hope.
• 31 BC - Foundation of the Roman Empire.
• 776 BC - First Olympic games are held in Greece.
1200
•
- Iron Age begins.
BC
1224
•
- Death of Rameses the Great.
BC
2000
•
- Abraham living in Canaan.
BC
2500
•
- Stonehenge stone circle built.
BC
2570
The Great Pyramid of Giza is completed. (Speculative theory,
•
-
BC
not conclusively proven.)
2900
•
- First monetary system introduced Mesopotamian Shekel.
BC
3000
Bronze Age begins. Oldest artefacts depicting wheeled carts
•
-
BC
in Mesopotamia.
3500 - Traditional date for the oldest cities known to date. Uruk in
• 3700 - southern Mesopotamia - Modern Iraq and Tell Hamoukar
BC
further north.
More evidence of cities. Tell Brak in modern Syria shows
4000
•
- evidence of administrative buildings andtraders. A seal stamp
BC
from the 5th millennium BC has been found there.
5000
Earliest known writing. Balkan-Danube Script, originating
•
-BC
6000
•
BC
8000
•
BC
9000
•
BC
9600
•
BC
from Europe along the Danube river, not yet deciphered.
- The plough is invented.
- Mammoths go extinct on the Siberian mainland.
- Colonisation of the Americas.
The last Ice Age ends. The world enters a warmer period
which still persists to date.
First domesticated crops. Evidence of the earliest villages and
10,000 the oldest known pottery from the Jomon period of Japan.
•
-
BC
This period is also thought to have been when dogs were first
domesticated.
20,000
• years - The last Ice Age is at its peak.
ago
Neanderthals die out. They lived mostly in what is now
30,000
Europe. It is important to note that modern Homo sapiens
• years -
lived at the same time and probably side by side with
ago
Neanderthals.
35,000
• years - Cave paintings in Europe.
ago
40,000
• years - Traditional date for the origin of Material culture.
ago
50,000
• years - Colonisation of Australia.
ago
75,000 Clothing invented. The oldest beads were discovered in South
• years - Africa dating back 77,000 years, right to the middle of the
ago
stone age.
-90,000
• years - Modern humans start migrating out of Africa into Eurasia.
ago
120,000
• years - Widespread use of pigments like ochre in Africa.
ago
170,000 Mitochondrial Eve. The first female ancestor of all living
• years - humans. This date varies from 150,000 - 250,000 based on
ago
various interpretations by scientists.
Adam is born. From the Y chromosome passed down only
170,000
through males, it has been calculated that ‘Adam’, the first
• years -
man on Earth, was created at this time. This date also varies
ago
by the same margins as ‘Eve’.
(It is curious to see that Adam and Eve seem to have been created at the
same time - this will form a very convincing part of our story in later
chapters.)
200,000
• years - First anatomically modern humans make their appearance.
ago
It seems that there may be a clash in this time line - did other humans
exist before Adam and Eve? This is also part of the puzzle which seems
to corroborate our theories in later chapters.
Source: New Scientist 2004
This was the easy part of the journey back in time, because we really
only covered the journey of one species; Homo sapiens and Homo sapiens
sapiens, the more civilised version of the earlier. There is a very fine line
between the two, and scholars are still at odds about where the one
suddenly became the other – a slightly more ‘streetwise’ version of its
prior self. There was possibly a period during which the two relatives
may have crossed over and lived side by side, and the clay tablets
certainly give us enough evidence to take such suggestions seriously.This part of our archaic history has however been rewritten many times
before and probably will be rewritten many times again, until we are
presented with irrefutable evidence from some credible, unquestionable
source. What we will take from this evidence is anyone’s guess, but it
would have to be pretty convincing to draw mass appeal from a generally
uninformed global populace. The funny thing is that such evidence has
existed for thousands of years, without us taking any notice of it. It’s as if
we emerged out of those prehistoric times as an ignorant species, and for
some obscure reason forgot everything we had been through. Could this
phenomenon have something to do with our shortened lifespan? A
curious anomaly, which is way out of step with the many years our
distant ancestors apparently lived? If that is the case, then why is it that
we only live for an average of 70 years, while the biblical characters and
others before them are shown to have lived for as long as 900 years and
even more? The answers are all well documented in the enigmatic clay
tablets which we will uncover in later chapters.
But for now, the next part of our journey back in time gets very
interesting because we have to really use our imagination and powers of
visualisation. That is what most anthropologists will want from you, as
the evolutionary jumps between the fossilised hominids become very
large. While evolutionists expect us to buy into the fantastic story of
human evolution, in the same breath most scholars will also tell you that
there are anything from 20 to 50 evolutionary steps between each
identified genus or species. Unfortunately we have had no proof or
evidence of any of these ‘in-between steps’ of evolution. What this really
means is that we face a dilemma of many missing links, and not just the
‘missing link’ that we often joke about. I know that we have all spotted a
potential candidate for the missing link in our neighbourhood, or a
potential candidate for Homo neanderthals, but you can rest assured that
you are mistaken. But then on the other hand, maybe not!
Let us go back to around 30,000 years ago. This is the time when
Neanderthals apparently disappeared from Earth. The debate around
Neanderthals has been raging since the first skeleton was discovered in
1857, just two years before Darwin published Origin of Species. But itseems that Darwin simply ignored this momentous find as it did not
really fit his model of evolution. Many theories have been postulated
about this species, mostly depicted as wild savages who were much more
primitive than humans. This seems a little arrogant and probably
premature since we now know that the Neanderthal brain was on average
1,200 - 1,750 ml, which would make it approximately 100 ml larger than
modern humans. If you consider that we only use 3% - 10% of our brains,
just think of what the Neanderthals would have been capable of today.
In 1999, the skeleton of a child was unearthed in Portugal. It was dated
back to 25,000 years ago. It had very strange features which looked like it
could be a hybrid between modern human and Neanderthal. This
prompted scientists to extract small fragments of DNA from three
different Neanderthal specimens, which showed that they were not
closely related to any present-day human population. Neanderthal
anatomy on the other hand is essentially human in scope, with the same
number of bones as humans, which function in the same manner. There
are however minor differences in thickness and strength. Based on some
rigorous dental studies, it seems that Neanderthals may have had a
greater longevity than modern humans, which may have also affected
their anatomy.
The reason I am taking you on this little journey, which I trust will end
before you get too bored, is purely to illustrate the complexity and
contradictions that have been troubling this field of science for centuries.
From these high levels of speculation and uncertainty, others like myself,
can take some respite that although I do not have a Ph.D behind my name,
I do understand the fields of gambling, speculation and deduction.
A perfect example of anthropologic contradiction lies in that some
evolutionists claim that Neanderthals were incapable of modern speech.
They apparently lacked the ability to produce the full range of vowels,
because the flat, non-flexing bone at the base of their skull and larynx
was positioned higher in the throat than in modern humans, or even
chimpanzees. A computerised reconstruction of this part of their anatomy
showed that the resonating chamber at the back of the mouth was all but
eliminated. This obviously supported their argument and placedNeanderthals in a completely different league to humans. But a new
reconstruction of the same anatomy showed it to be quite human. What
brought Neanderthals even closer to us modern humans, was a discovery
of the most complete Neanderthal skeleton in 1983, which contained the
first Neanderthal fossil hyoid bone. This bone is located in the throat and
is integral to the formation of sound in speech; it is indistinguishable
from that of modern humans.
To add to the intrigue of who these Neanderthal people really were, let
me add some more startling discoveries. In 1996, a small flute made from
the thigh bone of a cave bear was found in a cave in Slovenia. It had four
precisely aligned holes punctured on one side of the four-inch-long bone,
pointing irrefutably to evidence which strongly supports Neanderthal
‘humanness’. Furthermore, they made tools to make other complex tools,
buried their dead, had controlled use of fire, practised religious
ceremonies, used complex syntax in their spoken grammar and played
musical instruments.
Some Neanderthal graves have stone tools, animal bones, and even
flowers buried in the ground next to their remains. The corpse was not
simply dropped into a hole in the Earth without preparation; it was
prepared and buried in an unusual posture. This implies an awareness of
the ‘after-life’, demonstrates the existence of formal ritual and is also an
indication of strong social ties. This is also supported by evidence that
Neanderthal individuals with severe crippling injuries were cared for.
So? Were Neanderthals human and somehow related to us? Or were they
just wild and primitive cave men who deserved extinction? Maybe an
explanation of our own humanity may shed some light on the possible
answers a little later in this book.
Now that we have dealt with a possible human relative who lived on
Earth and shared it with modern humans for around 200,000 years, let us
travel further back and take a quick look at how the other hominid
ancestors fit into the picture. Once again, the most recent knowledge is
constantly under scrutiny and will most likely be modified as a result of
new discoveries in years to come. But years after the first discovery of
Australopithecus, scientists still do not rank them as ancestors to humans.In the areas of archaeology and anthropology, like in all the others of
science, disagreement is widespread. So, the information below should be
absorbed with a sense of speculation and uncertainty.
Just recently in the year 2000, scientists discovered a possible hominid
which they call Orrorin tugenensis. It lived around 6 million years ago in
Kenya and possessed clear features which indicate that it walked upright.
This was certainly an early entry for the two-legged race and some dare
to say that it may be one of the many missing links. Certain features, like
the teeth of Orrorin tugenensis, suggest this species could even be more
closely related to Homo sapiens than the many Australopithecus species
it predates. Like our molars, the molars of Orrorin tugenensis were small
compared to any of the australopithecine teeth. Their teeth also had very
thick enamel like ours.
Australopithecus afarensis lived from approximately 4 - 2.7 million
years ago along the northern Rift Valley of east Africa, and possibly even
earlier. They seem to be the root ancestors to all subsequent hominids
who were reasonably adapted for upright walking. But some of the bones
in their feet were slightly curved and looked like the bones you would
expect to see in a human ancestor who climbed trees. Although they
probably lived in flat savannah areas, Australopithecus afarensis was
capable of climbing trees in times of danger, and it is possible that they
slept in trees, like baboons do in areas where there are no caves for
shelter. Australopithecus afarensis is classified as an ape, not a human: a
hominid ape closely related to human beings but not necessarily an
ancestor.
So, maybe my friend Jana was right after all. When the apes came
down from the trees and started walking upright, we became human;
because the origin of bipedalism must be seen as the major step in human
evolution. Walking around on their hind limbs, leaving their forelimbs
free for other jobs, was an unusual mode of locomotion for mammals.
Suddenly, many things associated with being human became possible.
Such as fine manipulation with the hands and carrying food back to base
camp. This does not necessarily mean that four million years ago
primitive hominids evolved upright walking to develop a ‘food-sharing’economy. This kind of behaviour only arose several million years after
the development of upright walking.
Australopithecus africanus, or ‘southern ape of Africa’ was actually
the first discovery of an early hominid in Africa. They lived between 2
and 3 million years ago and probably stood around 4 feet 6 inches tall,
which means they walked upright. Raymond Dart found the well-
preserved skull of a child, the ‘Taung baby’, in South Africa in 1924 and
set the world alight with speculation. Could this be the missing link? For
quite a while this speculation did the rounds until it became quite clear
that the concept of a ‘missing link’ is far more complex than just one
skull. This discovery led to an intense focus on Africa as the probable site
of human origins and early development. But Australopithecus africanus
shows no signs of tool use or any kind of permanent living site. Their
huge teeth and skulls with prominent dorsal crests and large jaw muscles,
show that they specialised in eating tough plant material. They must have
been vegetarians, while our supposed ancestors evolved as omnivores
with a taste for meat.
The next group of hominids lived around 2.2 - 1 million years ago.
They were Australopithecus robustus. This seems to have been a more
robust version of Australopithecus africanus which seems to have
outlived its relative in southern Africa. Also referred to as Paranthropus
robustus, or ‘robust near-man’, but very few fossils of these hominids
have been uncovered.
At this point we really kick in with humanity. Homo habilis, is the
earliest known species of the genus Homo. The first human species. It
existed from approximately 2.2 - 1.6 million years ago in east Africa.
Only a few fossil remains have been unearthed so far, but they all exhibit
a clear trend towards a larger brain size. Homo habilis brains were about
30% larger than those of Australopithecus africanus.
Next in line was Homo erectus who lived from approximately 2 million
to around 400,000 years ago. Coming across this information was to me
like finding the holy grail. As we will uncover later, it is around this time
that the tampering with genetics first begins to pop its head out of the
pages of prehistory. Based on ancient scriptures on clay tablets fromSumer, the many steps of humanity were captured and preserved for us to
unravel. These dramatic tales will be looked at in great detail. Homo
erectus had a large brain ranging from 900 to 1,200 ml. This was a fifty-
percent increase in brain size over the older Homo habilis. The largest
brain sizes of Homo erectus fall within the range of modern humans,
although the brain is configured somewhat differently than our own, it
nevertheless provides a crucial link to the origins of Homo sapiens and
our very first direct relatives.
The following statement is the kind of scientific babble that truly
demonstrates our need to make empty pronouncements, when there is
actually not much to say. “The transition from Homo erectus to Homo
sapiens, the earliest forms of our own species, occurred approximately
300,000 to 400,000 years ago.” Do yourself a favour and ask any
paleoanthropologist to explain to you how exactly this transition
occurred! Unfortunately there is no clear explanation for this process and
they rely on some imaginary sequence of events and environmental
conditions that would have speeded up the evolutionary process. What
seem to be missing are the many gradual steps from one form to the
other. It is simply not feasible that the last female of the species woke up
one morning and gave birth to a completely new species.
What is however very important and impressive is the fact that they
found items such as wooden tools and weapons which give evidence of a
hunting lifestyle among Homo sapiens. There is much speculation about a
300,000 years old skull which was found near Petralona in north-eastern
Greece by Dr. Aris Poulianos in 1997. He claims that it is the most
complete find of early Homo sapiens and believes that human civilisation
existed on Earth over one million years ago. He has produced a variety of
tools and other implements which indicate that these ‘humans’ had the
ability to communicate with speech. There is much more to be explored
around this find, so for now I would like to return to what is historically
documented in Sumerian tablets.
Once again I ask you to place this in your memory banks, as it will be
used further as evidence of our birth as a ‘slave species’. A number of
130,000 year-old skulls have been found in southern and east Africa, onceagain giving us a link to the story of human creation. But we will
discover that our creation was followed by 200,000 years of exploitation
by a more evolved species who appeared on this planet out of ‘nowhere’.
The rest of the chapters will slowly introduce us to these progenitors of
the human race, expose the readers to the calculated steps that were taken
to create the ‘primitive worker’ as they called it, and the years of
enslavement that followed.
Why is it that we can trace slavery and the obsession with gold all the
way back to the very beginning of human origins? Therein lies the
terrible truth about the reasons for our existence, our ignorance and our
genetic origins. All of this information has been carefully handed down to
us in cuneiform clay tablets from the earliest days of writing. These
tablets will also explain our natural tendencies; why we look the way we
do, and why we could have possibly experienced such rapid stages of
mental evolution in the past few hundred years. Deep inside our genome,
in between all the brutal and barbaric genes, there is a natural tendency
for compassion, love and peace, which is encoded, but switched off.
Sometimes it breaks through the clutter, as the genome evolves and
allows us to move closer to a completely reconstructed DNA; one step
closer to a perfect genome and total enlightenment on both the physical
and spiritual fronts.