CHAPTER 5
The Genome: Human Software
Programme
By the time we reached the year 2000, there were two terms in the
global vocabulary which spread fear and confusion among people around
the world. ‘Millennium bug’ and ‘cloning’. But hindsight is an exact
science, and in hindsight it certainly seems that the first feared item,
namely the ‘millennium bug’was possibly a conspiracy by the global
computer industry to rake in billions of dollars on the back of ignorant
consumers. The millennium came and went with virtually no hiccups but
the coffers of the IT sector swelled with unimaginable wealth. The other
term that was brandished about carelessly by the media and
swashbuckling journalists trying their best to impress their readers with
their knowledge of this new science, was ‘genetic engineering’. This was
highly unfortunate as it was inevitably followed by another new buzz
word: ‘cloning’. This was very sad, as those two words immediately
conjured up gruesome images in the minds of the global population, of
‘butcher-like’ scientists, hacking and splicing human genes, while
creating an endless number of humanoid monsters and other
unimaginable creatures who will overpopulate the world. People were
imagining horrific tales of human-animal clones and many other inter-
species clones of unthinkable horror. There was talk of cloning extinct
animals like the mammoth, sabre tooth tigers and even some dinosaurs.
This was however a typical sensationalistic response by the media in an
attempt to attract readers and audiences. You see, if they were to report
responsibly on the subject, keeping the facts as scientific and realistic as
possible, they would not have had as large a response from the consumer,
whose perception of science and progress is pretty much driven byHollywood.
But the lack of understanding of this exciting new field of science was
suddenly thrust into the limelight of global politics and attracted the
attention of religious groups worldwide. In a flash the world had a new
‘evil’ to fight. Lengthy debates on cloning and genetic engineering
erupted all over the world, causing one of the most controversial issues of
the new millennium. The truth is that genetic engineering is the most
exciting development in the history of Humankind. As we develop this
knowledge and refine our skills in this area, we will come ever so closer
to dealing with most, if not all disease in living creatures, but more
importantly, we will come to understand our imperfect genome. This
knowledge will help us in speeding up our evolutionary process by
unlocking the ‘Junk’ genes which will most likely help speed up our
spiritual evolution. What this really means, is that we will not only be
able to deal with our physical disorders and malfunctions, but also our
mental and spiritual shortcomings. This means we can speed up the
evolution towards a violence-free global community that strives for
absolute physical and spiritual harmony. This is what excites me most
about this new science of genetic engineering. But before we can
elaborate on this subject, we need to dispel some myths and
misconceptions you may have heard from your mechanic while he was
changing your oil.
In short, genetic engineering deals with the study of our genome,
splicing, duplicating, copying, replacing and any form of manipulation
involving genes in our DNA. There is so much interest in the actual
activity of genes, and what kind of effect they have on our bodies, that
there is very little time to dream up the creation of monsters. My
assumption is that the most active area of genetic engineering is the study
of genes for medical research and medical applications. After all, we are
driven by the ‘greed’ gene, and in a global capitalist economy, genetic
healing is where all the money and power of the future will be. It is now
known that genetic engineering will most likely be able to treat any
human disease imaginable. It follows that the world will soon be run by
two major players. The media – telling us what to think; and genetics –allowing us to be what we want to be. But we first have to understand
much more about this field of science before we can make such claims
convincingly.
So what are genes? We talk about genes as if we see them on a daily
basis. As if we all have a stash of genes somewhere in our bodies and we
can reach in and grab a handful whenever we need to. Well, to a certain
extent this is true, because every cell in our body (with the exception of a
few) holds our genetic material in the nucleus of the cell. These are called
eukaryotic cells and could also be put into the animal cell category,
where the chromosomes are in the nucleus of the cells, surrounded by a
nuclear membrane. The other kind of cells are called prokaryotic cells,
but we are not dealing with those in this instance.
Our DNA performs the most complex activities imaginable, and yet the
structure of the DNA molecule is so incredibly simple, that it truly
baffles the mind. I am extremely concerned to find that the majority of
source material I used, called DNA the ‘most complex molecule in our
body’.
I strongly disagree. The simplicity with which the molecule is put
together is another indication of the miracle of life and the absolute
supreme intelligence of the creator God with a big G, or the Supreme
Being, or whichever name makes you feel comfortable. I always imagine
DNA as a very long line of Lego blocks, made up of only three different
colours. If we consider that DNA is a molecular structure that contains all
the codes and information needed to build, control and maintain a living
organism, we once again stumble upon the subtle hint that we should live
forever because DNA should control and maintain a living organism. All
the programmes and codes that control our body are in this tiny molecule.
The structure is actually so simple, that it raises another question. Could
the DNA be somehow extended to whatever length we want it to be?
Since we only use 3% of our DNA at present, this suggestion may seem a
little premature, but you never know what our future needs may be. I
would like to suggest, that once we have come to terms with our genetic
material and unravelled the mystery behind its code, we will be able to
sculpt future DNA molecules exactly as we need them. On the other hand,that may already be pre-programmed into the molecule itself, as part of
its evolutionary function. In a sense, like the metric system. All you do is
add a zero, and you create a new unit of measure. See… that’s how
simple it is. But let’s take a quick tour of the genome to demonstrate. For
those with molecular science as a major, please skip this section.
Every cell in our body has a nucleus. In this nucleus lies a long double-
stranded molecule shaped like a twisted ladder, called DNA:
deoxyribonucleic acid. This ladder is broken up into 46 chromosomes
which pair up into 23 pairs. One side of the chromosome is derived from
the mother, the other side from the father. People born with Down’s
Syndrome have one extra chromosome, totalling 47 chromosomes,
causing their unusual features and brain activity. Each side of the twisted
DNA ladder chromosome is made up of only three components. A sugar
known as deoxyribose, phosphate, and any one of four bases which are:
adenine, thymine, guanine, or cytosine. They are represented by the
letters A, T, G and C. That is why scientists get very excited when they
find traces of phosphate on Mars, which could indicate life possibly
driven by DNA. The sugar and the phosphate bind together to form the
two parallel sides of the DNA ladder and the bases join each other from
each side to form the rungs of the ladder. But the bases making up the
rungs of the DNA ladder can only join in a specific sequence. A joins
with T, and G joins with C. It is this specific combination of A-T and G-
C, which contains the codes for life and all the complex functions that
keep us going. A short stretch of this chromosome, with a unique
sequence of A, T, G, C, is referred to as a gene. And because of the
unique sequence of the bases, this gene is specifically coded to control a
specific function in the body. This gene can also be identified and
mapped because of its unique sequence of components. This is referred to
as ‘gene mapping’. The largest human chromosome contains around 280
million DNA base pairs, and it is estimated that the entire human genome
consists of about three billion base pairs. All this genetic material in the
cells of a human is called the genome.
But genes make up only a tiny fraction of the entire genome. This
amazing discovery forms the central doctrine of my arguments in thisbook. Incredibly, our active genes only make up about 3% of the total
DNA in our chromosomes. Why?
Between each gene there are long stretches of DNA which do not
appear to code for anything. Why would such a complex molecule be
created with only 3% functionality? Scientists refer to this as ‘Junk’ DNA
because they have not discovered what secret messages it is hiding if any.
This clearly makes no sense according to the evolutionist theory. If the
genome was evolving from a simple to a complex structure, these long
sections of the DNA would not exist. It would make sense that a
relatively small number of genes may have evolved over time, only to
become obsolete, but the fact that 97% of our DNA seems to be inactive
leaves many questions unanswered.
One of the obvious arguments for the state of our overextended
genome, is that it was genetically manipulated or tampered with during
the early days of our existence as a species. Our genome could have been
created or copied from an existing genome of another species, or even
tampered with to allow only a small portion of it to function. If we are
able to do this today, why could an equally advanced group of beings not
have done this to us humans a long time ago? The ancient evidence from
our prehistory spells out very clearly that this is actually what happened.
We will cover the actual translations of clay tablets with reference to this
in later chapters.
When it was decided to sequence the entire human genome, the ‘Junk’
was included in the project just in case it might have as yet undiscovered
significance. I predict that such functionality will be discovered as we
evolve and discover more and more. The outcome of the Human Genome
Project was that scientists managed to sequence and map our human
genome. All three billion base pairs. The surprising thing is that 99.9% of
the sequence is the same in every single human on Earth.
The Human Genome Project was started in 1990 with its objective to
basically draw a map of the entire human genome and thereby gain a
basic understanding of the entire genetic blueprint of a human being.
From this map they could then start to identify unique sequences which
indicate genes and their special functions. The progress on the GenomeProject convinced researchers that the three billion base pairs of the
human genome could be fully sequenced by 2003, two years ahead of the
original schedule. This success, coupled with the growing sense of
urgency and recognition of the value of DNA sequence information, led
to a major acceleration in human genome sequencing in early 1999. The
international consortium of public domain laboratories committed to
produce a ‘working draft’ of the whole genome in the year 2000, as an
intermediate step in the programme, while the complete and fully
accurate referenced sequence would become available during 2003.
The international sequencing consortium was releasing new data
continuously, as soon as it was available. By the end of 1999, over one
billion bases of the working draft were in the public domain, and
amazingly, the ‘two billion base milestone’ was passed during March
2000. The first complete working draft was a major scientific milestone
for Humankind. This was achieved in June 2000 and the draft provided an
overall outline of the genome. This became an extremely useful resource
for biologists everywhere, for the very first time. But the draft was not a
fully accurate sequence – work on it continues, and probably will for a
long time to come as they discover hidden secrets in this seemingly
simple molecule.
As is the case in all science and discovery, we are always taken by
surprise when we least expect it. The genes of many forms of life have an
additional surprising feature. The genes contain stretches of DNA, called
exons, each of which codes for part of a protein, and introns, which are
stretches of non-coding DNA. The relationship between the inactive
introns and junk DNA is not understood. Genes consist of alternating
introns and exons, and the programmed genetic codes are contained in
several scattered exons, rather than a continuous stretch of DNA. The
largest part of the DNA consists of seemingly never-ending stretches of
junk DNA. In humans, 97% of DNA consists of non coding genes while
in very simple creatures like fruit flies only 17% of the DNA contains
non-coding genes. This is another possible indication of strange
manipulation that must have occurred at some stage in our distant past
and ties up perfectly with the 97% junk DNA discovery. The non-codingintrons make no sense in the evolutionary scheme of things. It also means
that yeast with only 4% non-coding genes and fruit flies with 17% non-
coding genes are more evolved than humans, within their own DNA
structures. At the time of writing this book the non-coding gene
percentage in apes was not clearly established yet.
Bacteria have no introns and biologists are uncertain whether early life
forms lacked introns, and whether they only evolved into our DNA
relatively late when complex multi-cellular life arose. That might be so
in primitive organisms, but the perplexing genetic code of humans leaves
many questions unanswered. I think the scientists should revisit their
theories and turn them around. They should familiarise themselves with
the scriptures of the Sumerians which clearly describe genetic
manipulation in the process of creating the ‘Adamu’. This information
will help them fill in some of the missing links in the great puzzle of
human origins.
The arrangement of genes into introns and exons enables the encoded
message in one gene to be read in more than one way. The process is
called alternative splicing and has allowed scientists to code as many as
500 different messages from one small stretch of DNA. Alternative
splicing is a recent discovery and biologists do not yet know how
important it is in life. What it does point to very clearly, together with the
knowledge that we only use 3% or less of our genome, is that we have a
long way to go for our genome to become fully functional. It also shows
how enormously complex the encoding for humanity can be, in only a
few genes.
I raise the primary question once again. What will humans be capable
of when the full potential of the genome is unlocked? OR…
What capability was humanity deprived of when all this potential was
unplugged at the point of our creation?
We have hardly stumbled upon this incredible discovery, when the
insatiable human ‘greed’ gene pops its ugly head out. While the people of
the world are squabbling over the ethics of genetic engineering, cloning
and other processes, which are mostly driven by emotional outbursts and
very little understanding, greedy pharmaceutical giants are attempting tolay claim to and patent some of the newly discovered genes. Already they
are seeing the future and the fact that if they can take ownership of some
of our genes, they will control all medical procedure involving such
genes in the future. It does not take a rocket scientist to see where this
can lead to. If you ever believed in a conspiracy to create a super race of
humans on Earth, hold onto your hat. This may just be the beginning.
Once the control of gene therapy lands in the hands of the rich, this kind
of science fiction fantasy will become an instant reality. This is what we
should guard against as the human race. Stop worrying about the cloning
and the monsters and the babies without parents, but rather worry about
the exclusive control of the human genome by a handful of giant medical
firms. As research and knowledge grow, money will be able to buy you
everything. Height, hair, eye colour, muscle tone, sexy features, health
and even eternal life. I suspect however that the ‘eternal life gene’ will be
the last one we shall conquer.
There does however seem to be a level of sanity and fairness in global
legal circles. It seems that the patent applications by some of these giants
have been overturned, as genes are regarded to be the intellectual
property of all humans and cannot be exclusively owned by one group or
individual. What was suggested is that companies can protect newly
discovered medical procedures or drugs, which results in a desired
treatment through genetic manipulation. This will protect their
discoveries from exploitation for the normal 15 to 20 year period, while
they recover their research and development costs. This way all the
people can benefit from progress without any socioeconomic
discrimination.
During the past two decades, the first major breakthroughs in finding
genes associated with hereditary diseases were announced. These
included examples such as cystic fibrosis, haemophilia (A and B forms),
muscular dystrophy, and Huntington's disease. Each one of these is an
example of an inherited disease caused by defects in a single gene. More
recently, genes have been discovered which contribute to more complex
diseases, notably cancers of the bowel, or of the breast. These are two
examples of the many diseases in which other factors, both in other genesand in the environment, also affect the onset of the disease. Complex
diseases such as cancer, heart disease, diabetes, and many psychiatric
disorders all involve multiple genes, unlike some defects caused by
single genes. Yet the multiple gene disorders are by far the most common
conditions affecting human health. Until recently, their sheer complexity
has limited progress in our understanding of these diseases. The access to
the human genome sequence, with a complete catalogue of all human
genes, has opened the way to tackling all these conditions, to understand
the underlying biology of each disease and speed up the development of
new and better cures.
But sequencing the human genome is only a first step. Now we know
that a single gene can produce more than one protein and that a different
set of proteins is found in each type of cell in the body. The big challenge
facing scientists is to map the human ‘proteome’. This map will unveil
which proteins are made by which genes and which combination of
proteins is at work in each type of cell. This process is a little more
complex than just mapping the genome and will most likely take a lot
longer than ten years. But it will transform our understanding of how
genes build humans.
Since 1999, we have identified a huge number of genes and their
activity. The speed of new discoveries in genetics has been astounding.
Let us take a quick look at a short list of genes that have been identified
and linked to specific activity. It will give you a glimpse at some of the
crucial functions in our bodies, which we will be able to manipulate in
time. Many genes have also been identified in plants and animals. As
strange as it may seem, their relevance to human development can often
be paramount. For example, identifying what genes make plants and
insects resistant to radiation and many other characteristics that would be
of benefit for human survival.
Genes in the following areas of activity have been identified:
Asthma; lung cancer; breast cancer; Alzheimer’s; hearing; large family
of cancer genes; male fertility; radiation resistance – 107 genes;
Parkinson’s; human hereditary genes; fat and obesity; sleep-wake cycle;UV light resistance in plants; hair loss; pain; vision; embryonic
development; emphysema; azoospermia; colon cancer; neurodegenerative
disease; psoriasis; tumour suppression; epilepsy; skin cancer; juvenile
diabetes; cell death clock – 150 genes; learning disability; bipolar
depression; Finnish company Jurilab discovered over 200 new genes
linked to heart attacks and coronary disease.
This sample is just a drop in the ocean. Thousands more genes have
been identified and by the time this book is released, there will be many
more. There is so much more going on in this field of science that I
cannot resist just outlining a few more examples:
Scientists are working on a novel kind of DNA vaccine which could
protect people against a wide variety of conditions: from snake bites to
HIV, by directly triggering the production of antibodies.
Biotechnologists in Massachusetts are taking animal genes that make
growth-promoting proteins and putting them into oysters, to make them
mature faster and produce pearls sooner. The first oysters to undergo the
treatment grew 2.5 times faster than ordinary oyster shells and they also
took less time to make bigger pearls. What this will do to the value of
pearls is anyone’s guess at this point.
In a study of identical and non-identical twins, a medical team in
London has shown that acne is 80% genetic. Environmental factors, such
as eating the wrong foods or wearing greasy make-up, are relatively
unimportant. They are close to identifying the genes which control the
activity of acne, which will lead to more effective and cheaper acne
treatment.
Hans-Hinrich Kaatz and his colleagues at Jena University in Germany
did an experiment which showed that genes introduced into genetically
modified plants, jump between species into bacteria in the guts of the
animals eating the plants. Could these kind of jumping genes have played
a role in speeding up evolution, by jumping from virus to host and
altering the host’s genetic structure? This theory is presented very
strongly by Sir Fred Hoyle in his book Our Place In The Cosmos and we
deal with it in more detail in the Panspermia chapter.
Researchers in Cincinnati are discovering how small changes in a genecould influence a person’s tendency to abuse opiates, and distinguish
between a person who is unlikely to abuse heroin or one predisposed to it.
Discoveries like this will make it easier in future to pinpoint and prevent
addictions. Researchers have confirmed this finding and have found
several new variants of the gene, one of which appears to protect against
drug addiction.
A group of genes called ‘novel genes’ apparently undergo a change
when a person starts to develop prostate cancer. This can be used as an
early warning system. Now all they have to do is figure out what to do
with this gene and they may reverse the process.
Mutations in the FOXP2 gene on chromosome 7, have been found to
cause specific language impairment. The gene seems to be necessary for
the proper development of human speech and language.
The 17 CREB genes play a vital part in the mechanism of learning and
memory. If one of them is not working, no long-term memory can be
formed. They are switched on in real time, when the brain lays down a
new memory. This means that the act of learning actually turns on these
genes. It is a great argument for the evolution of genes and DNA, as it
clearly displays a way in which ‘nature’ works together with ‘nurture’.
This is the kind of interaction between stimulus and response, which may
unlock the introns and junk genes under specific conditions, causing the
release of previously unused genes, resulting in further evolution and
activation of the genome.
Vasopressin and oxytocin are hormones that stimulate bonding
behaviour. The vasopressin receptor gene lies on chromosome 12 in
humans and is controlled by a promoter whose length varies between
species. In rodents it seems to play a part in forming monogamous pairs,
which means to fall in love, in human terms. Different promoter lengths
have also been found among humans. This is possibly the reason why
some people cannot hold down a normal relationship. It could also mean
that the probability of divorce is as highly inheritable as is the possibility
of a long and happy marriage.
Now, here is some emerging evidence about that elusive ‘violent’ gene
I have been referring to. Research at the Institute of Psychiatry in Londonoffers a fascinating hint of how antisocial behaviour can be affected by an
interaction between genes and environment. They examined a group of
New Zealanders for evidence that an abusive childhood can induce
antisocial behaviour. And they found that indeed it can. But far more
strongly in people of one genotype. Men who had been maltreated as
children and had ‘low-active’ genes for monoamine oxidase A on the X
chromosome, were much more likely to get into trouble with the law.
They could be described as violent and display antisocial traits in a
personality test. Those with ‘high-active’ genes were broadly resistant to
the effects of childhood maltreatment. The difference between the high-
active and low-active genes lies once again in the promoter lengths. Long
and short promoters produce low activity, intermediate promoters
produce high activity.
A gene called p53 defends you from disease and decay, but p53 also
dictates how likely you are to get cancer and how fast you age. It is
probably the most important molecule in the formation of cancer. Faults
in the gene itself, or any of the activities it controls, are likely to be
involved in the development of nearly all tumours. After 25 years of
research, we are finally beginning to understand how p53 works, and how
it either causes or prevents cancer.
Howard Hughes Medical Institute researchers have identified a large
number of new genes that control the formation of tiny, hair-like cilia
that cover the surfaces of many organs in a wide variety of creatures.
Cilia are also widely present in the human body, including the brain,
nose, ears, eyes, lungs, kidneys and sperm. These genes are important
because cilia are critical for transport and as sensory structures, wherever
they are located.
The purpose of presenting some of these basic examples is to
demonstrate how far we have come in the field of genetics over the past
25 years. Things that would have been far-fetched then, are commonplace
today. We have pushed the boundaries of knowledge way beyond what we
thought would be possible. But as we learn, we realise how little we
know. It’s as if every new page is just the introduction to a whole book.
We must remind ourselves that some of the new truths we have learnt,will be proven wrong with time. But the need for discovery and
exploration is well encoded in our genome and only extinction will put a
stop to it. So while we are discovering new scientific breakthroughs and
celebrating its relevance to our species, we should also celebrate the
‘uncovering’ of old truths, from pre-history. The clues and the
information that were left behind for us by our ancient ancestors, in the
hope that we may build on their experiences, without having to learn
much of their hard-earned knowledge all over again. We are a fragile
species on a knife’s edge, precariously balancing between the rapid
evolution towards the universal community of beings, or the destruction
and extinction not only of humanity, but the entire planet. The road
forward is pretty clear. But we must find a speedy solution to the
millennia of propaganda, religious oppression, dogma and fear which
have been entrenched so deeply in humanity, that it will take some kind
of miracle from the real God, to release those who are trapped by it.
Since 1977 when split genes were discovered, much has been written
about why introns and junk DNA exist. There have been countless
theories all taking a stab at this perplexing genetic phenomenon. Like the
relationship and relevance between introns and exons; various selection
mechanisms; selected gene reproduction; adaptive genes with a ‘fitness’
advantage; constructional selection and constructional advantage; the
‘nature-nurture’ controversy; low and high pleiotropy; genotype-
phenotype relationship; evolution of proteins; the effect of original
‘proto-genes’; critical and non-critical regions; selfish DNA; competition
between DNA sequences; new genes evolving and being added to the
genome; useful genes; exon shuffling; high and low modularity; folding
genes and their effects; competition between exons; random intron
insertion; and many more complex and even simple issues. Insane stuff,
isn’t it?
What strikes me is that seemingly all these philosophies have
approached the subject from the perspective that introns and junk DNA
are just a waste of space on the genome, whose only possible function is
that of their relevance of position. They may play a role in DNA division,
but because all the introns are discarded by mRNA (messenger RNA)before it duplicates the split DNA strand, introns are actually perceived
as an unnecessary waste of space, and a disposable by-product which just
happens to be present in our genome. But since all human DNA is 99.9%
identical, why is this wasted space still present in our DNA, and how
could DNA have evolved into this form when evolution favours the
dominant gene? Scientists should shake their own personal dogma about
wisdom derived from archaeological discoveries and pay more serious
attention to the idea that we may have been created some 200,000 years
ago in the image of our maker. The makeup of our DNA has a great deal
to do with that specific incident.
There does not have to be a conflict between evolution and creation.
But most scientists are so blinded by the evolutionist doctrine, that they
bluntly refuse to take seriously the relatively new Sumerian translations
of the creation of the ‘Adamu’. If we can just get our heads around this
‘incredible fairytale’ from our distant past, we may just be able to tie up
the various loose ends that don’t seem to add up. Chromosomal Adam
and mitochondrial Eve have both been dated back to the same time
around 200,000 years ago. We all share the same genome with all this
wasted space on it, and according to our ‘Adam and Eve’, we have all had
it since the point of creation. These are critical clues, which lead me to
reach only one logical conclusion. The genome was meant to be the
length it is, which happens to be the same length of that of our maker, our
genetic donor. The genes have however been tampered with, resulting in
the removal or shutting down of most of them (97%), leaving behind an
unintelligent, primitive and subservient creature. But many of the
undesirable genes of this maker remained behind in the newly created
DNA. If we can get our heads around this, it must mean that much of our
anatomy and character is inherited from our maker. Let us not forget the
very important words which many of us live by, that we were created ‘in
the image of our maker’.
If this is the case, then we need to ask, who was our maker(s)? How
evolved were they? How smart were they really? How much of their
genome did they use compared to ours? Because according to my theory,
if they had the perfect complete genome, they certainly did not behaveaccordingly. They certainly created a big mess on this planet, leaving
their offspring to survive and fend for themselves in the kindergarten of
the universal community of beings. Is this the way we will behave when
we start to colonise Mars?