CHAPTER 6
Panspermia
I have often wondered why so many depictions of aliens from space
carry such resemblance to us humans. All those who claim to have been
abducted, or those who have been contacted by aliens, mostly describe
them in very similar fashion. The strange thing is that these aliens seem
to have features similar to humans and not some other insect-like
monster from space. Is it because the individual who claims to have seen
these aliens may simply be hallucinating or projecting our own image
onto them? Or could it be the influence of mass media and the many
movies that have graced our screens depicting aliens mostly in a
humanoid form? Or could there possibly be a more logical or possibly
even scientific explanation for this curious phenomenon? Since we have
come to know that the Earth is not the centre of the universe, and that the
universe is quite possibly endless, we can start opening our minds to new
possibilities. But like many things we ‘seem’ to have discovered in the
last two centuries on Earth, we find out that they have already been
discovered by our distant ancestors. It is especially true for the subject of
astronomy. The ancient Mesopotamians, Egyptians, Greeks, Chinese and
Americans, all had a superior knowledge of the cosmos compared to us
today. They knew things about the planets and our solar system that we in
the so-called western world only rediscovered in the latter parts of the
20th century.
One such cosmic phenomenon which was reintroduced into modern
cosmology in the 1970s was the ancient Greek concept of Panspermia.
This word can be translated as ‘seeds everywhere’ and its first recorded
advocate was a Greek philosopher known as Anaxagoras of Clazomenae
in Asia Minor, born about 500 BC. He was from a noble family, but
wishing to devote himself entirely to science, he gave up his property tohis relatives and relocated to Athens, where he lived in intimacy with
Pericles. Shortly before the outbreak of the Peloponnesian War he was
charged with impiety, which was, ‘denying the gods recognised by the
State’. He not only had the honour of giving philosophy a home in
Athens, where it flourished for a thousand years, but he was the first
philosopher who introduced a spiritual principle which gives matter life
and form. Anaxagoras laid down his doctrine in a prose work entitled On
Nature of which only fragments are preserved. Anaxagoras postulated the
idea of independent elements which coexist in space and air, creating life.
He called them ‘seeds’. They are the ultimate elements of combination
and are indivisible, imperishable ‘primordia’ of infinite number, and
differing in shape, colour, and taste. Later writers referred to these seeds
as ‘omoiomereia’ which was an expression of Aristotle, meaning
“particles of like kind with each other and with the whole that is made up
of them”.
It is fascinating how the ancient ‘gods’ seem to make their appearance
in the strangest places at the strangest times. Here we are trying to
unravel the origins of a completely different subject, and yet we find that
our protagonist Anaxagoras’ life was greatly influenced by the ancient
gods because he ‘denied the gods who were recognised by the state’. It is
very clear that these ancient gods must have had a firm hold on the Greek
authorities. The fact that a philosopher was jailed because he disobeyed
the gods, goes a long way in supporting the outlandish theory that these
gods must have had a real hold over the ancient kings. And as we will
find out, their control was absolute.
When Panspermia was reintroduced in the '70s by a handful of serious
scientists, it was met with loads of criticism and the kind of ridicule
which has been experienced by most visionaries throughout human
history. Somehow Aristotle got in on the act some 2,400 years ago with
his theory of ‘spontaneous generation’, which had become the preferred
philosophy until recent times. It was however grossly abused and misused
by creationists ever since to support their narrow-minded religious
beliefs, which portray a romantic picture of Adam and Eve in the garden
of Eden.But then in 1864, Louis Pasteur shocked the scientific world with his
landmark experiment, disproving the concept of spontaneous generation.
This discovery also had a practical impact on medicine, proving that
germs are the primary causes and carriers of disease. In a simple
experiment using a sterilised flask, he showed that a culture can grow in
the flask only if germs enter it, and that plain air cannot initiate the
growth of micro-organisms. “There is no known circumstance in which it
can be confirmed that microscopic beings came into the world without
germs, without parents similar to themselves.” (Louis Pasteur, 1864.).
He clearly demonstrated that life comes only from life. If this principle
had been accepted as the fundamental theory on the origins of life then,
today we may still be unsure how life on Earth began, but at least we
would approach the question differently. We would assume that life here
had to be seeded somehow and we would investigate the possible
mechanisms for such seeding. Is it possible for bacteria and other
microscopic organisms to come to Earth from space? Can they survive
harsh conditions, radiation, extreme temperatures for long periods of
time? Maybe even millions of years?
Since Mr. Pasteur made his discovery, many scientists have supported
his findings with their own voices and their own experiments. But the real
twist came in the '70s when British astronomers Sir Fred Hoyle and
Chandra Wickramasinghe rekindled international interest in Panspermia.
While their statements were quickly dismissed by the majority of the
scientific world as an old-fashioned philosophy, their experimental
evidence could not be ignored. But as time passed and these renewed
theories attracted more interest from a growing field of scholars, the
evidence presented became overwhelming. Suddenly, Panspermia
attracted a new, more appropriate name in the form of ‘Cosmic
Ancestry’. But to prove this Cosmic Ancestry theory required some solid
proof and evidence. After all, scientists all say they work with evidence…
don’t they? This is really the fundamental difference between them and
theologians… or is it? It seems to me that as time passes by, the tenets of
science are firmly rooted in the speculative and the possible, more often
than in the proven. Even in the face of irrefutable evidence there isalways an element of error that may have crept in. This is the stuff of
science. Always has been and probably always will be, at least until we
attain that perfect genome status, which will hopefully elevate us beyond
the need to know the physical, while putting us firmly in touch with the
spiritual.
So, to argue the possibility of life arriving on Earth from space
requires some proof of life in space… and if it does exist, how does it
reach Earth… and once it has reached Earth, what kind of role can it
possibly play in the creation of life, evolution or the speeding up of
evolution? This is what Hoyle and Wickramasinghe proved in the early
'70s. By using spectroscopic analyses of light from distant stars, they
showed that there was evidence of life in the interstellar dust. This dust
exists throughout space as leftover matter from the creation of stellar
systems and contains microscopic organisms like bacteria. It is also
possible that there may be viruses and other organic material present in
this so-called dust. It got there as a result of cosmic collisions of space
bodies like planets and even supernovas, which occur when a star
explodes spreading its content over vast distances of space. By definition
this really means that the universe must be filled with life of all kinds.
Given its size and age, there have been cosmic collisions occurring for
billions of years. The additional fact that the universe is growing at the
speed of light, creating unimaginable numbers of stars and planets,
creating more matter that can collide in space, spreading more living
organisms throughout space, every millisecond of Earth-time. Now that
we have the evidence, the next step is to convince the world that such life
could actually reach our planet, or any other planet. Obviously these
organisms will only survive and flourish on planets with conditions
favourable for their growth. So how does this dust filled with life reach
our planet and other planets?
We will discuss the presence of asteroids and comets in space. Comets
are probably the most fascinating objects in the universe. I say universe,
because the assumption is that if they exist in our solar system they will
most likely exist in others. The more we study comets, the more they take
us by surprise and every year reveals amazing new facts. The latestestimates are that all the comets in our solar system actually outweigh the
total mass of the planets. If this is true, and much of the evidence about
their ability to distribute living organisms throughout space is also true, it
certainly turns comets into the primary distributors of life in the universe.
Comets are thought to be leftover matter from the creation of solar
systems and have been described as giant ‘dirty’ snowballs on some kind
of orbit around the sun. These orbits are very erratic and can vary from a
few years to many thousands of years. Asteroids, on the other hand, are
thought to be leftover pieces of planets or moons due to cosmic
collisions. There is still a lot of debate about the difference between the
two. It is possible that asteroids are just the remains of old comets whose
ice and dirt have been burnt off and evaporated over thousands of years of
travelling in space – either by getting too close to the sun or too close to
other large bodies which radiate heat; or even the constant radiation of
distant stars and solar winds. As comets and asteroids fly through space
they pick up bacterial life from the interstellar dust, which gets embedded
in the ice and rock. The ice in comets covers and protects the microscopic
organisms on their journey through space. The comet becomes the carrier
for the living organism and together they can journey for longer than
humanity has been on Earth. The latest findings are that microscopic life
can survive indefinitely under the right conditions. This means that once
the 'living space dust' is embedded in the comet, it can survive for as long
as it takes to be deposited on some hospitable planet.
The tail behind the comet is quite spectacular and can stretch for
millions of kilometres. It consists of gas and dust which is discharged
from the coma (nucleus head) and will contain many of these
microscopic living particles. Thousands if not millions of comets have
come into close proximity to Earth, leaving behind billions of miles of
living space debris from their tails. These comets cross the paths of many
planets, leaving behind the living debris waiting to pounce on an
unsuspecting cosmic body. When the comets are close to the sun their
activity increases and they discharge as much as one million tons of gas
and living dust into space every day. As the planets orbit the sun they will
inevitably travel through this living debris, which get trapped by thegravitational pull of the planet.
But how many of these comets can there possibly be? Millions may
have passed close to the sun in the past, but would the solar winds not
drive their space dust away, into deep space? This is where that amazing
human nature resurfaces, to remind us of how suspicious we are of each
other and how obsessed we are with conflict. In the '60s when space
activity increased around the Apollo moon landings, US intelligence
photographed many explosions in the outer limits of the atmosphere,
while on the lookout for enemy missiles. They were obviously waiting for
an attack from the Soviets and therefore these cosmic events must have
really given them a scare. But luckily they soon realised that it was not
the enemy, but comets and other space objects between 30 and 50 metres
in diameter, which were exploding when entering the upper atmosphere.
This information was apparently kept classified until 1994 and the
realisation of what was actually happening possibly prevented a full scale
nuclear war.
It seems that US intelligence has lightened up a little since the fall of
the
the USSR, because on the 28 of May 1997, NASA announced the
incredible news that thousands of comets “as large as houses”, enter
Earth’s atmosphere every day. They actually break up and are destroyed
at between 1,000 and 20,000 kilometres above Earth. The principal
investigator for NASA’s polar spacecraft instruments, Dr. Lewis A.
Frank, described their descent as a “relatively gentle cosmic rain”. This
information also feeds the theory that all the water on Earth actually also
arrived from space.
The miraculous thing about comets, is that because they are made up
mainly of ice, organic compounds trapped inside, such as bacteria,
viruses and even larvae, can remain in suspended animation for thousands
of years. In fact, it is now believed that bacteria, spores and viruses can
survive in comets forever, until they are either destroyed or deposited in a
life-friendly environment. There have been many scientists who
vigorously supported the distribution of life from space, before Hoyle and
Wickramasinghe reintroduced it to the world. Sir Isaac Newton was justone of them. He was convinced that the continued arrival of cometary
material on Earth was essential for life on this planet. Since then it has
been calculated that roughly 1,000 tons of cometary debris enters the
Earth’s atmosphere annually.
But comets and asteroids either crash into us, or they explode in the
atmosphere, or they burn up in the atmosphere. Remember that these
cosmic bodies are travelling in space at incredible speeds of between 10
km per second to as much as 100 km per second. But because there is no
friction, the speed is not a factor. It does however become a factor when
these objects get sucked towards a planet and enter its atmosphere. The
friction in the atmosphere starts to slow the objects down, heating them
up in the process. This has been one of the major hurdles NASA had to
deal with, to protect the space shuttles against burning up on re-entry
from space. We saw the tragic accident when some of the protective tiles
were dislodged and the shuttle Columbia disintegrated because of the
intense heat which resulted, while on its way back to Earth from the
International Space Station.
So now we know that there are constant minor cosmic collisions in
which Earth is involved and we have witnessed some spectacular
collisions between near-neighbour Jupiter and a giant comet in 1994. We
recognise that the planets and moons bear the crater scars of giant
collisions from the distant past and the asteroid belt looks like it could be
the leftover matter from a planet that was destroyed in a cosmic collision.
Is it not possible that at some stage in the distant past Earth was also
involved in a cosmic collision? The kind of collision, which could be
responsible for the strange phenomenon that all the land on Earth at the
beginning of Earth-time, was concentrated together on one side of the
planet, while the other had a gaping hole filled with water? A collision of
this kind between Earth and another planet would have resulted in the
contamination and sharing of the seeds of life between the two planets.
As they moved apart, the one settled in an orbit around the sun where
Earth is at present, while the other planet was spun into an orbit that took
it into deep space, very similar to the orbits of many comets. As these
planets evolved and life on them evolved, they would have shared manysimilar species of animals and plants originating from the shared seeds of
life, transferred between them during their collision. Should we be
surprised to find similar kinds of animal species and plant species on
both planets? It seems highly feasible that given their shared seeds of
life, they should be evolving along similar paths. As the larger of the
planets round the sun every couple of thousand years and their humanoid
inhabitants come to Earth to observe the activity on such a beautiful
planet, should we be surprised that the so-called ‘aliens’ we encounter
share many human-like features with us? We will revisit this topic later
as we unravel the Sumerian scriptures.
EVIDENCE OF CRATERS ON COSMIC BODIES
Virtually all cosmic bodies have craters, which remind us of the violent
cosmic past during which the seeds of life were transmitted throughout
the universe.
Asteroid Eros
Comet Wild 2
Tswaing crater, Pretoria, South Africa 1.8km Craters on Earth’s
across created by a 30m meteor
moonPlanet Mercury
Callisto - Moon Of
Jupiter
While some comets and asteroids explode in the atmosphere, and
others explode just before impact several kilometres above ground, as a
result of the tremendous air pressure which builds up ahead of it, some
actually do end up crashing into the ground. I am sharing this with you
because it’s the kind of stuff we always see in sci-fi thrillers, but we
never realise how real it all is. As they say, ‘truth is stranger than fiction’,
and this certainly applies to the stuff that is going on around us in space.
The best known atmospheric explosion of a meteoroid happened above
Tunguska in central Siberia on the 30th June 1908. The explosion
flattened the forest for roughly 15 kilometres in every direction,
completely devastating thousands of square kilometres of the forest. It
was apparently heard up to 600 kilometres away and seen over 1,000
kilometres away. There are reports from Paris, France, that shortly after
the event, pedestrians stopped to see an eerie, unusual glare in the east.
The object was most likely a meteor, estimated to be around 60 metres in
diameter, because a comet that size would have exploded higher in the
atmosphere. But nobody investigated the site until 20 years after the
explosion, which leaves the evidence a little sparse. There must be some
sort of magnetic comet target in Siberia because a similar atmospheric
explosion occurred again in 1947. Poor Russians. An atmospheric
explosion is much gentler on the invading meteor than a full impact. It
allows the content of the meteor to be dispersed over a wide area without
being destroyed by the shock of the impact. The effect on the planet is
however much more devastating when the object explodes above the
ground. This is what the bomb experts in the 2nd World War realisedbefore they dropped the first nuclear bombs on Japan.
In March 1965, a 7-metre object exploded approximately 30 kilometres
above Revelstoke in Canada. Investigators arrived promptly and
recovered many fragments a few millimetres in size. The amazing thing
was that most of them were not altered by heat, proving that a plausible
delivery mechanism for living cells from space is not only feasible, but
most certainly possible. But the greatest volume of organic space matter
comes to Earth in the form of dust. This delivery system far outweighs
the deposits from impacts of asteroids and comets. Okay, so if life can
survive a large impact, how does it survive the trip in small dust particles
through the atmosphere? Surely the heat or the X-rays and even UV
radiation will kill microscopic organisms that are so exposed? Some
startling discoveries have been made about this method of the transport
of life from space to Earth.
Besides being able to survive UV radiation levels 3,000 times higher
than humans can, many bacteria actually thrive at temperatures higher
than boiling point. Since bacteria and viruses have been known to possess
the ability to mutate very rapidly while spreading new forms of disease,
causing havoc in the medical field and in the preparation of antibiotics, it
is plausible that they could mutate very quickly from a state in which
they reside in space, to an adapted state for conditions on Earth. Bacteria
actually have built-in cellular equipment that can help them survive
sudden heating in space. They are called ‘heat-shock’ proteins, which
respond in seconds to external stimuli in bacteria. It seems that these heat
shock proteins are closely related across a wide range of species. This is
simply one protective mechanism which allows these organisms to arrive
alive on Earth, despite drastic and sudden temperature changes. I am
convinced that these proteins will be the subject of great interest to
genetic engineers, once they have figured out how to incorporate those
genes into the human DNA. With genetic engineering, anything is
possible, even developing a new human characteristic similar to that of a
bacterium that can resist sudden changes in temperature. This would help
our human space exploration endeavours greatly, and probably be a
necessary scientific process to help NASA reach more inhospitable placesin space.
To get back to the vulnerability of organisms in space, it has also been
established that a dust layer only a few microns thick will protect the
contained microbe against UV radiation very successfully. So the
organisms move towards Earth through the mesosphere, about 120
kilometres above the surface of Earth where various gases may also
protect them from X-rays. Then they descend through the stratosphere for
a few days where they are protected from UV radiation by the ozone.
After this they drop quite quickly to the surface. This can be on mountain
tops, rivers, deserts or wooded areas, basically spreading into every nook
and cranny of the planet.
We have all seen shooting stars at night and many of us quickly make a
wish, because somewhere back in time this became a ritual for some
unknown reason. I wonder if the origins of this tradition have anything to
do with ancient people’s beliefs that comets and shooting stars were often
associated with plagues and diseases? The wish was possibly more of a
prayer for health and protection against the disease announced by the
fiery messenger in the sky. Shooting stars are actually small meteors that
enter the atmosphere and fall to the ground while burning up. Most of
them evaporate, but many do land up on the surface of Earth. So every
time you see a shooting star, you may be witnessing the arrival of
extraterrestrial life on Earth. But if shooting stars burn up in the
atmosphere, will the microorganisms survive the trip? When tiny
meteoroids of a few centimetres crash to Earth they burn up and
evaporate. Particles the size of a pinhead will move at about 10 km per
second and heat up to about 3,000 degrees Celsius. This is enough to kill
any organism entering the atmosphere. But bacteria and viruses are much
smaller than pinheads and they do momentarily heat up to about 500
degrees Celsius after entering the atmosphere. Is this enough to destroy
them?
The University of Wales experimented with Escherichia Coli bacteria
under extreme temperatures to determine if the bacteria can withstand
quick temperature bursts of up to 700 degrees Celsius for periods of
about 20 seconds. The amazing thing is, the bacteria survived and afterbeing placed in a nutrient broth, it grew back to normality. These
experimental temperatures are more extreme than that which would apply
to a micro-organism. The organism would slow down quickly, only being
exposed to high temperatures for a few seconds, after which it will gently
descend to Earth.
In the '70s Hoyle and Wickramasinghe received high levels of ridicule
for their proposals but through their excellent scientific corroboration,
their critics were silenced, and today it is pretty much universally
accepted that space contains the ‘ingredients’ of life. But their theory
went a bit too far for some when they suggested that all life comes from
space. Including bacteria, viruses, protozoa, seeds, pollen, other bits of
organic material containing more complex DNA and even larvae.
There is another theory for evolution of life on Earth referred to as
‘Gaia’. This was introduced in the early '70s by James Lovelock who
proposed that life controls Earth’s environment to make it suitable for
life. It is this Panspermia and Gaia combination of theories that others
have referred to as Cosmic Ancestry.
A strange combination of Darwinian evolution and spontaneous
creation. It postulates that while evolution drives all living organisms,
life has always existed in the universe before it arrived on Earth, and
Earth was just another destination point in the universal path of natural
selection while life was spreading to other planets. Well, that’s how I
understand it at least. I find this very confusing and unnecessary to say
the least. What seems more logical is that all the planets in the universe
have had, or will have continuous exposure to new life from the
interstellar soup of microscopic life. Some planets have had life for much
longer than others and have been able to evolve more over time. But the
big question remains – where did the original life forms begin before they
were distributed throughout the universe so successfully? This is a
question for philosophers more than biologists and scientists, so I will
leave this subject for them to debate. We will see that some of the
questions about our origins as humans may point us towards some
unorthodox answers about the much bigger question regarding the origin
of life. I must point out that my objectives in this book are more to dowith uncovering our human origins, and not necessarily finding the
origins of life. The following events have been presented as evidence for
the theory of Cosmic Ancestry. It does not seem to do much more than
present irrefutable evidence to support Panspermia in its original form:
Two scientists at Cal Poly showed that bacteria can survive
19 May
•
without any metabolism for at least 25 million years; they
1995:
are probably immortal.
24
The New York Times ran a story about bacteria that can
• November survive radiation much stronger than any that Earth has ever
1995:
experienced.
7 August NASA announced fossilised evidence of ancient life in
•
1996:
meteorite ALH 84001 from Mars.
27
Geneticists showed evidence that many genes are much
• October older than the fossil record would indicate. Subsequent
1996:
studies have strengthened this finding.
29 July
A NASA scientist announced evidence of fossilised
•
1997:
microscopic life forms in a meteorite not from any planet.
A microfossil that was found in a meteorite and
Spring,
•
photographed in 1966, was recognised by a Russian
1998:
microbiologist as a magnetotactic bacterium.
Fall,
NASA’s public position on life-from-space shifted
•
1998:
dramatically.
4 January NASA officially recognised the possibility that life on Earth
•
1999:
comes from space.
19 March NASA scientists announced that two more meteorites hold
•
1999:
even stronger fossilised evidence for past life on Mars.
The team operating the mass spectrometer on NASA’s
26 April Stardust mission announced the detection of very large
•
2000:
organic molecules in space. Non-biological sources for
organic molecules so large are not known.
19
A team of biologists and a geologist announced the revival
• October of bacteria that are 250 million years old, strengthening that2000:
case that bacterial spores can be immortal.
13
A NASA team demonstrated that the magnetosomes in Mars
• December
meteorite ALH 84001 are biological.
2000:
June
Geneticists reported evidence that the evolutionary step
•
2002:
from chimps to humans was assisted by viruses.
August
Photos of fossilised cyanobacteria in a meteorite were
•
2004:
reported by a NASA scientist.
Source: Brig Klyce - www.panspermia.org
Throughout history comets have been associated with diseases and
plagues which followed closely after the comets’ appearance and
disappearance. We also now know that thousands of small comets
evaporate in the upper atmosphere daily, releasing their precious content
to rain down on us. Viruses and bacteria can mutate rapidly, infiltrating
our cells and causing random changes to specific genes, which may result
in evolutionary changes quite rapidly in a chosen species. This leads to
the conclusion that rapid jumps in the physical evolution of species can
occur and have occurred.
One such beautiful example, which was reported in New Scientist in the
November 13 edition of 2004, is the sudden appearance of bats in the
world some 50 million years ago. This is a real evolutionary dilemma,
because until now, there have been no fossils found of any intermediate
animal linking their rodent ancestors to modern bats. But a gene called
BMP2 changed all this around 50 million years ago. This gene is present
in bats but not in mice. How did this gene suddenly appear? Given some
of the theories we have covered in this book, it is possible that the
genome caused itself to evolve as part of the ‘self improvement process’
within a species. This seems a little far-fetched as it would mean that
humans could also evolve in this direction and start to fly, if our
‘feedback’ or natural process of selection determined that we as humans
would be better off flying. But herein lies the rub as far as I can see. If
our human genome already has its ‘foundation’ or its entire structure pre-erected, it must be in some sort of state of suspension just waiting for the
right sequence of genes to fill the empty space. It will therefore reject any
alien gene combinations and only allow predetermined genes to fill the
inactive spaces taken up by junk DNA. But this is a theoretical situation
with humans, because we suspect that our DNA has been tampered with.
This situation will however not apply to creatures like rodents, which
evolved into bats. So what else could have caused the BMP2 gene in bats
to suddenly appear? Realistically, as Fred Hoyle has shown, it could have
been a viral effect on the DNA of the species causing some kind of
mutation in the cells, which resulted in the subtle but dramatic change in
its genetic structure.
BACTERIUM
But what is a virus? And what actually happens when a virus infects
our body? There are thousands of different viruses recognised by
biologists, but it is possible that millions may exist. We all know viruses
very well from getting colds and flu. A relatively common virus can
sometimes cause unimaginable carnage and death in humans. The 1918
flu epidemic killed around 20 million people and every year about 36,000
people die from a simple bout of flu in the USA alone. The Hutchinson
Dictionary of Science describes a virus as follows: “An infectious
particle consisting of a core of DNA or RNA, enclosed in a protein shell.
Viruses are not cellular and they can only reproduce by invading other
living cells where they use the host cell’s system to replicate themselves.
In the process they can actually disturb and alter the host's DNA. The
healthy human body reacts by producing an antiviral protein called
interferon which tries to prevent the infection from spreading to adjacentcells. Viruses mutate very quickly to prevent the host from developing
permanent resistance.”
SPORE
When we get flu, the viruses attack our cells, break the cell wall and
spill the contents into the spaces between cells. This causes a number of
unpleasant side effects, swelling, pain, runny nose, headaches,
inflammation and more. Then it interacts with our DNA by first splitting
the double-helix strand and attaching itself to one of the strands. The
virus then replicates itself many times, while our body tries to fight this
invader with its own immune defence system. At some point the virus
exits the cell, leaving our DNA to recombine the two strands of the
double-helix once again. It can happen that the DNA strands recombine
incorrectly, resulting in different activities of the genes. In an instant we
have the beginnings of a possible mutation or even an initial step towards
evolution of that organism. Viruses can mutate so quickly, it is
impossible to keep up with the development of new vaccines. It is clear to
see that viruses are perfect organisms that are made for survival. If they
have the ability to invade our genome and cause dramatic disfigurative
disease and death, is it not possible that they can be equally responsible
for genetic mutations that have the opposite effects, which can lead to
positive evolutionary steps? Would it not be in the interest of the viral
DNA to develop a stronger, more resilient host to ensure its own
continued survival? A perfect argument for the ‘selfish gene’ in some
respects.
Bacteria on the other hand are microscopic organisms, each oneconsisting of a single cell which has no nucleus. Bacteria can be found
virtually everywhere on Earth. Even in the most inhospitable places with
high acidity, high temperatures and low temperatures. Some bacteria are
parasites that can be very harmful because they produce toxins. Others
can be beneficial to humans and sometimes even vital for our survival,
like the digestive bacteria in our stomachs. Bacteria have DNA but also
additional small circular pieces of DNA called plasmids. These plasmids
carry additional genetic information and move freely between bacteria
even if they are of a different species. Plasmids are also responsible for
bacterial resistance to antibiotics but they are very useful tools in genetic
engineering. The staggering thing about bacteria is their ability to
reproduce in as little as 20 minutes. They normally divide into two new
equal cells through a process called binary fission. Other single-cell
organisms like amoeba also divide in this way. Scientists estimate that
we have only identified between 1% and 10% of bacteria on Earth. This
figure will probably remain this low, as new bacteria arrive from space
every minute of the day. New Scientist published an article in October
2004, in which they describe lightning as “nature's own genetic
engineer”. When lightning strikes the ground, it kills the organisms
within a specific radius, but the bacteria further away have been shown to
undergo changes in their DNA. Timothy Vogel from the University of
Lyon, said that the bacteria actually take up any kind of “stray” DNA as a
result of the shock: “This could explain why gene swapping is so
common among bacteria.” They also suggest that this phenomenon will
help bacteria evolve very quickly. Until now scientists have been puzzled
by the rate of evolution in bacteria because the natural rate of new DNA
uptake did not match their findings. This new discovery has gone a long
way to explain the rapid rates of evolution in various life forms on Earth.
Most people think of bacteria as nasty little things that should be
obliterated with new knowledge… ‘We don't need bacteria… they just
cause trouble and make us sick.’ But we should realise that life on Earth
would most likely be impossible without bacteria and when scientists say
that the universe is teeming with life, they can back it up because of the
properties of bacteria.Let’s first look at the crucial role bacteria play in human life. We have
more bacteria in our bodies than we have human cells. They pass from
mother to baby in breast milk virtually as soon as the baby is born. It is
now known that the struggle for equilibrium by bacteria in babies plays a
vital role in their development. While some bacteria are harmful and may
cause the slowing down of development and growth, other bacteria are
vital for our health. It is now known that giving young babies various
probiotics, for example Lactobacillus, will reduce conditions like eczema
and allergy later in life. The following are the predominant bacteria
living in our gastrointestinal tract:
Lactobacillus; Streptococcus; Staphylococcus;
• Stomach - Enterobacteria; Yeasts.
There is between 0-1,000 bacteria per ml.
Lactobacillus; Streptococcus; Bifidobacterium;
• Duodenum - Staphylococcus; Enterobacteria; Yeasts.
100 - 100,000 bacteria per ml.
Bifidobacterium; Bacteroides; Lactobacillus;
Small
Streptococcus; Staphylococcus; Clostridium;
•
-
intestine
Enterobacteria; Yeats.
1,000 - 10,000,000,000 bacteria per ml.
All the above plus Fusobacterium; Peptostreptococcus; E.
• Colon
- Coli; in huge quantities of up to 10,000,000,000,000
bacteria per gram.
Source: New Scientist
When Fred Hoyle says that there is organic life everywhere in the
universe, he not only substantiates it with scientific proof, but he also
explains that such proof of life is only possible if we take into account
how bacteria can multiply. Then suddenly it all makes a great deal of
sense and we can easily explain where such an abundance of life in space
comes from. If you take a single bacterial cell in favourable conditions,
the average time for it to duplicate itself is about two hours. One makes
two, two makes four, four makes eight and so on. This means that by theend of the first day you will have a colony too small to be seen by the
naked eye. But in two days the colony of 1000 will become 1,000,000
which suddenly becomes just visible with the naked eye and is about a
tenth the size of a pinhead. After 4 days you will have 1,000,000,000,000
bacteria which will weigh about 1 gram. In 5 days the colony will weigh
about 1 kilogram and in 6 days you will have a ton of bacteria. Every day
the weight will grow by 3 zeros, which should give you a pile of bacteria
the size of Mount Everest in just 11 days. It will take only 13 days to
produce the weight of Earth in bacteria, our galaxy in 19 days and the
estimated visible universe in just 22 days. So when people ask how it is
possible that there is such an abundance of organic life in the universe,
you can explain it to them very simply by using these facts.
It seems that airborne infectious diseases, plagues and epidemics
literarily descend upon the people of the world like a blanket from the
sky. And yet for millennia people believed, and men of science and
medicine believed, that these diseases were passed on from person to
person. It does not need a scientist to conclude that it is impossible for
these infections to spread worldwide, from person to person within hours
or a few days, and yet this happens every year with the coming of the flu
season. These diseases can be linked to the periodic appearance of a
number of comets which leave behind their millions of tons of living
debris as they fly by the Earth on their irregular orbits. This is also true
for the horrific plagues of the past. It seems to tie up quite logically. A
comet flies in close proximity to our planet, filling space with deadly
unearthly pathogens; a few weeks later the planet flies through this debris
minding its own business, but collecting deadly bacteria on its way.
Before you know, the world is covered in this microscopic alien species,
causing diseases and havoc because our bodies have to generate a brand
new form of resistance which we do not possess.
Some archaeologists think that the Pharaohs used their knowledge of
viruses and bacteria to cast so-called spells on their tombs. By including
an ancient strand of bacteria or viruses in their tombs, these organisms
simply went into ‘suspended animation’ while trapped inside the tomb,
only to be reactivated when the tomb raiders opened the tomb up a fewthousand years later. The unexplained deaths of well known
archaeologists shortly after entering the tombs have puzzled scholars for
decades. If we attempt to explain it in terms of viruses or bacteria, we can
rapidly remove the ‘dark wizardry’ out of the equation. The bacteria have
been locked up for a long time and probably do not exist on Earth in their
original form any more. This means that our bodies are not used to the
bacterium and cannot develop antibodies quickly enough. The result is
swift and tragic. Other examples of this kind of pre-historic
contamination are bacteria that have apparently survived for 4,800 years
in the brickwork of Peruvian pyramids; and for 11,000 years in the gut of
a well-preserved mastodon; and possibly even 300 million years in coal.
But some bacteria have an even more effective survival strategy, they
form spores. Spores are bacterial cells with thick protective coats in a
complete dormant state.
In this form they can basically survive forever. Many plagues of the Old
Testament can be explained very comfortably by bacterial phenomena. In
just one example around 1,200 BC, God punished the Philistines for an
attack on the Hebrews, by ‘emrods in their secret parts’. Emrods are
translated as bubos which occur as a result of bubonic plague. The plague
among humans has become well documented since the 14th century and
some scientists still cling onto the theory that it was caused by fleas
which carried the bacterium to humans from rats which were infested
with the Pasteurella pestis bacterium. While this may have been the case
in a small number of infections, we have clearly shown in Chapter 11
how impractical the spread of such an infection is, when attributed to rats
and fleas only.
So what have we learnt in this chapter? That cosmic collisions have
been occurring for billions of years; that asteroids and especially comets
are carriers and distributors of life in the universe; that life exist in
abundance everywhere in space; and that life comes to Earth from space
every second of every day as it has been for millions of years. We also
discovered that bacteria and viruses can mutate very rapidly, possibly
causing plants and animals to mutate by interacting with their DNA, andthat electricity and other environmental factors cause bacteria and viruses
to mutate on their own. All this information leads to the conclusion that
Panspermia is no longer a dubious sector of science, but the predominant
theory of how life arrived on Earth and that larger cosmic collisions
between planets would result in the transfer and sharing of much of their
respective organisms, which would lead to a parallel evolutionary
development on two separate planets.
So, if we can accept these scientific findings of the past 30 years, why
should we not accept the possibility that a species similar to us may have
evolved on such a parallel planet? All we need to do now is to prove that
such a planet exists in the depths of our own solar system and we may
very well have the answer why aliens are often described with a striking
resemblance to us humans. The strangest thing is that it has been revealed
to us many times in the past, but we seem to be determined to ignore it.