CHAPTER 7
Planet X
I was 22 years old, during my first year out of varsity, trying
desperately to become a pop star. But deep inside, the heart of a closet-
scientist was beating, constantly being attracted by news that made my
muso buddies yawn with boredom. The news clip of a Planet X appeared
on TV as suddenly as it disappeared. I was riveted by the story of
scientists thinking they may have discovered a large new planet beyond
Pluto in our own solar system. The report was very convincing as it
quoted some credible sounding cosmologists. But that one single
occasion was the first and the last time I heard about it. I expected to read
about it in the papers the following day or in some weekly magazines but
I was bitterly disappointed. None of the papers carried any stories of such
content and nobody else remembered anything about it either.
Unfortunately this was about 13 years before the internet and finding
information regarding this kind of topic was not easy, especially in South
Africa where the media was well controlled by the Apartheid
government. Strange objects in the sky? That sounded too much like a
communist threat. So, for a brief moment my curiosity and imagination
was stirred, only to fade under the pressures of nightly gigs and stars of a
different kind in my eyes. In the years to come I was steadily drawn to
the cosmos and literature of a diverse nature. I never realised how
seriously the idea of Planet X was being taken and how vigorously it was
pursued by a large number of astrophysicists and other cosmologists. The
news report that impressed me so much was based on a similar article in
the New York Times on 19 June 1982, which suggested that something
big, far beyond the reaches of the solar system, is tugging on Uranus and
Neptune, causing gravitational fluctuations that are resulting in
irregularities in their orbits. The force suggested a large object, far awayand unseen, which could lend some credibility to the speculation of the
existence of a planet in deep space.
The discovery of planets in the last 200 years had more to do with the
science of mathematics rather than the building of bigger and more
powerful telescopes. In the same way that astronomers predicted the
existence of Uranus and Neptune some 200 and 150 years ago, they now
predict the existence of a large planet way beyond Pluto. Because of the
mathematical irregularities in the gravitational orbits of the outer planets,
they were so certain that such a further planet exists, that they called it
Planet X.
Is it possible that the Asteroid Belt was previously a planet known as
Tiamat?
Our solar system is in a relatively quiet part of the Milky Way, our
galaxy, but it was born out of a violent past, which is evident from the
large number of impact crater sites on all the planets around us. Take a
pair of binoculars and look at the moon for a little while; you will not
believe the number of craters you can see. Our closest celestial body has
been bombarded by asteroids and other flying space debris for billions of
years. The same can be said for Mercury, Venus and Mars. The many
moons of the other gaseous planets also carry the scars of our violentcosmic past. It is actually a miracle that our planet has escaped a serious
cosmic collision for long enough to allow life to develop and flourish.
Well it did until around 65 million years ago they say, when the last giant
asteroid crashed into Earth apparently causing the extinction of the
dinosaurs. This asteroid is referred to as K-T. But let us take a broader
look at our place in the universe to get a more realistic perspective of the
big picture.
The Big Bang still seems to be the popular scientific theory for the
creation of the universe and all things in it. This theory postulates that
some 13.8 billion years ago the universe was born out of a point of
singularity, which exploded creating stars and galaxies while expanding
at the speed of light. I recently attended a lecture given by South African
born astronomer Dr. Tony Readhead, who heads up Caltech's Cosmic
Background Imager project. He shared some of the fascinating images
from deep space, generated by the new generation background-imagery
radio-telescopes. After taking the packed auditorium on a journey
through time away from Earth into the depths of the universe, I literally
felt as if I was travelling through time. The images of galaxies and cluster
galaxies and quasars truly boggled the mind. But when he presented an
image of the stuff beyond 13.8 billion years, it sent a shock through my
entire body. It was pitch black. Nothing existed beyond this point.
Nothing that we could see or imagine. We had just travelled beyond the
edge of the known universe. The amazing thing is that with all the
knowledge in the world, nobody could even hazard a guess about what
might exist beyond this point. It is however possible that if you carry on
moving beyond this point for a long, long, long time, you may reach
another universe. Because, given infinity, everything will happen. But
this really gets too close to opening myself up to philosophical attack, so
let’s get back to the more familiar part of the physical universe.
So the universe continued to expand, creating new stars at an
unimaginable rate. It seems that planetary systems such as ours, with all
the planets, their moon satellites, as well as other bodies are formed from
gas and dust accompanying the birth of their own star, in our case the
Sun. The first stars which formed from the primordial hydrogen andhelium of the Big Bang could not have had any planets because there
were no heavy elements present as yet. These elements that are necessary
for the creation of planets, only made their appearance once the second
generation stars started exploding and scattering such heavy elements
throughout the universe. These elements necessary for planet-building
were built up in the stars by nucleosynthesis. Once a star is born, the
debris that results from this event is scattered throughout the universe,
ready to get absorbed into the new planets which begin to form around
the star.
As I mentioned earlier, as recently as 1994, there was still great
scepticism about the existence of other planets in the universe, outside of
our solar system. But since then many new planets have been discovered.
Now it is believed, mainly because of the continual discovery of new
planets, that planetary systems do not form in isolation, they are the
norm. Interstellar clouds are so large that when one of them collapses, it
breaks up into enough pieces to form hundreds, if not millions of stars
like our Sun. These interstellar clouds are like astronomical nurseries,
constantly giving birth to new stars. These stars then form a loose
association known as an ‘open cluster’ of stars, which is dispersed as the
individual stars follow their own orbits around the galaxy. The magnetic
fields generated by the young stars keep a strong grip on the material that
surrounds them. This force will trap all matter extending far from the
core of the star. But as the core of this new stellar system collapses to
form a star, some of the material from which it is being formed, remains
out at a distance from the core of the star. It is kept out from the centre of
the cloud by the residual spin of the whole system, while it settles down
into a disc of star dust around the young star. Discs like these have been
detected around young stars, which largely confirm our understanding of
how planetary systems are formed. A similar disc effect can be seen
around the large planets like Saturn, but only much, much smaller in size
.
The heat of the star blows away the lightest materials like hydrogen
and helium that are closest to the star. The material that gets left behind
is made up of billions of tiny grains of dust that collide and sticktogether, building up larger lumps of what are the beginnings of new
planets. These lumps become small rocks, then big rocks, and even bigger
asteroid-size rocks. While these rocks orbit the Sun in swarms, they
bump into each other while gravity keeps pulling them tighter and tighter
together. The largest lumps have the highest gravity and attract more and
more material until they grow into large planets and moons.
1. Primordial cloud develops from
which stars will be born2. Primordial disc of stardust
3. Nuclear fusion blows away the
lightest materials creating space for
planets to develop.4. Primordial disc spreads
around the star resulting in
planet formation
Source: NASA
So now we have our solar system with the closest star to us, our Sun,
giving it light and heat and life. Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars are the
four inner planets of our solar system. But where do all the asteroids and
comets come from? Between Mars and Jupiter there is a ring of cosmic
rubble known as the asteroid belt. It is believed that the combined content
of this asteroid belt would constitute a planet about four times the size of
Earth. This is a fascinating bit of information from the world of modern
science, because the ancient Sumerians had the same knowledge aboutthe size of the 'possible' planet before it became the asteroid belt. In the
well known 'Enuma Elish' or the Epic of Creation, the clay tablets
describe in detail how the large planet they called Tiamat, was smashed
to pieces in a cosmic collision. It further describes the planet as having
been a 'water giant' with 'golden veins' being exposed in her 'belly' as the
moons of Nibiru smashed into her. It further explains how Earth inherited
its water and its wealth in golden ores. It all came from planet Tiamat.
The details in the Epic of Creation are so vivid that it goes way beyond
imagination. How did the authors of those clay tablets know so much,
more than 5,000 years ago? Can the asteroids possibly be the remains of a
large planet which was destroyed by some celestial collision a long time
ago? Today we know that the asteroid belt is made up of similar materials
to the four inner planets. This would suggest that there should be golden
ores in the many fragments whizzing around the Sun. The incredible
coincidence is that the clay tablets tell us the same. They clearly outline
that the rich golden ore on Earth is very similar to that in the pieces of the
asteroid belt. The tablets which describe the Epic of Creation are no
ordinary stories. They give us a detailed sequence of events that caused
the creation of our planet Earth. We are told in no uncertain terms taht
Earth is the largest remaining piece of the original planet called Tiamat,
which was shattered and became the asteroid belt.
Beyond this belt of gold, there are 4 planets known as ‘gas giants’
which most likely have a small rocky core while the rest of the planet is
made up of various gases, giving them their distinctive colours. All thisknowledge and research was rewarded in April 1999 when the first
multiple system of extrasolar planets was discovered 44 light years from
Earth. Upsilon Andromedae is a Sun-like star, which was found to have
three giant planets, two of which orbit closer to their parent star than the
Earth is to the Sun. From that moment on, the previous belief that planets
were not the norm in the universe had changed for ever. At the time this
publication went to print, astronomers had discovered approximately 130
extrasolar planets. Our own solar system is estimated to be 4.5 billion
years old. The bombardment of planets by space debris most likely
started just after 4.5 billion years ago and ended 4 billion years later.
Although we have reached a fairly stable period in our solar system, there
are still many life threatening monsters flying around in our own cosmic
backyard.
Comets have been sighted and written about for thousands of years.
They have been seen as messengers of God or omens of evil. But where
do they come from? There are really two known sources of comets. The
Kuiper Belt, which is just beyond Neptune, is said to contain a billion
comets, which are ice-and-rock bodies left over from the formation of the
solar system. The other source of comets is known as the Oort Cloud
which basically surrounds our entire solar system and is said to contain a
million million comets, more than all the stars in the entire Milky Way. I
remember in the '80s when I first watched Carl Sagan's ‘Cosmos’, they
were estimating that there were 100 million stars in the Milky Way. By
the year 2004 it was estimated to be 100 billion stars. This is another
quick indication of how our knowledge is evolving and how it shapes our
perceptions. One of the theories of how the Oort Cloud actually formed,
is that during the creation of the solar system, besides all the material
that made up the giant planets, there must have been many frozen balls of
ice and dust that were influenced by the gravity of the gas giants, in the
same way that objects in the asteroid belt came under the influence of
Jupiter. It is possible that some of these icy objects were pulled into
orbits, taking them close to the Sun, and as a result evaporated. Those
that did not evaporate, were flung out from the region of the giant planets
and ended up in giant orbits, possibly taking them 100,000 times as farfrom the Sun as Earth. This is a distance of some 15 million million
kilometres, which is so far away from the Sun, that the dirty snowballs
were partly influenced by the gravity of other stars. Over billions of years
their orbits got smoothed out and they became a spherical shell of comets
around the solar system, now known as the Oort Cloud. Although this is a
theory, the Oort Cloud remains a reality, consisting of all those billions
of comets, large and small.
The comets that we see from time to time are all on elongated elliptical
orbits around the Sun. They broke away from their parent cloud and were
hurled towards the Sun. They keep coming in close to the Sun as they
round it, and then get flung out into deep space with a kind of pendulum
effect. Their orbits can be many thousands of years. What is very
interesting is the similarity of the orbits of these comets and the
theoretical orbit of the elusive Planet X. If you choose to believe the
Sumerian scriptures, the orbit of Planet X, which they called ‘Nibiru’, is
very similar to that of the comets that orbit the Sun. “A large elliptical
orbit” is what the clay tablets called it, all those thousands of years ago.
But since we modern civilised humans only discovered the last three
planets in our solar system in the past 220 years, it is difficult for us to
comprehend how someone 6,000 years ago could have known so much
about our solar system and other planets beyond. This is a very disturbing
reality which clearly points to our gross lack of knowledge relating to the
cosmos in the 21st century. But just very recently we were handed a clear
reminder of what some maverick astronomers have been trying to prove
for a few hundred years, and in the process restoring some lost pride in
the modern day cosmologists – the existence of Planet X. This is not
some fancy science fiction name made up by wacky students, but simply
the Roman numeral X, which stands for the number 10. Planet X is the
tenth planet in our known solar system. One other interesting point I
should raise, is the accidental symbolism that also dates back to Sumer
and a certain ‘planet of the crossing’ which was often represented by a
cross on their clay tablets and cylinders. We will examine these ancient
artefacts later in the book but for now let us examine a story about a
French astronomer, Alessandro Morbidelli, who in 2003 dared to suggestthat there may be a large planet way beyond Pluto, which is on an
elongated elliptical orbit around the Sun that lasts about 3,600 years. The
similarities between the facts in his article and the Sumerian texts are
quite staggering. The interesting thing is that seemingly, the French
astronomer had never heard of the Sumerian stories of the planet called
Nibiru.
And so the obsession with Planet X goes on. In February 2003, a
prestigious French monthly called Science & Vie, published an update on
the planetary makeup of our Solar System, in light of recent discoveries
in the Kuiper Belt. The article made the sensational announcement that
there is one more, unknown, planet in our solar system. The writer called
it “A phantom planet whose possible orbit is too elongated to be seen”.
The article was based on statements by Frenchman, Alessandro
Morbidelli, an astronomer at France’s observatory at Côte d’Azur. He
suggested that while the solar system was chaotic in the beginning, there
was a celestial collision involving a planet that existed where the asteroid
belt is today. This all happened about 3.9 billion years ago and as a result
of those events the so called ‘Phantom Planet’ is caught in this unusually
long elliptical orbit of several thousand years. He further stated, “I expect
that one day we will discover a new, Mars-sized planet!”. He also
provided the journal with a proposed sketch of the elongated orbit which
included a speculative guess on where the planet may have been at that
point in time. Is it a coincidence that this sketch is virtually identical to
that of Zecharia Sitchin, which he proposed in his book The 12th Planet
in 1976? Since this French astronomer is not the first to be talking about
Planet X with such certainty, it seems to me that this kind of speculation
is too close to be coincidence. There must be something more to this
obsession than mere speculation by a handful of ‘wacky’ scientists n
search of an invisible planet. Not so invisible it seems, as many scientists
have presented mathematical calculations that point to the existence of
something in deep space which supports their calculations.Sitchin has become a leading authority in the analyses of ancient
Sumerian clay tablets. He is said to own the largest private collection of
over 800 ancient cuneiform clay tablets. Sitchin has studied these and
other tablets extensively for many years and has deciphered and also
interpreted many complex messages and presented startling theories,
which are now being taken more seriously by growing numbers of broad-
minded scientists. One of the many stories inscribed on some of the
tablets was a long complex tale of Nibiru, the home planet of the
Anunnaki, and ‘gods’ of the Sumerians. This knowledge of the
Sumerians, is what the French astronomer seemingly rediscovered,
around 28 years after Sitchin first published it in The 12th Planet after his
translation of these ancient tablets.
• In the beginning the solar system was “chaotic”.
There was another ‘supplementary planet’ where the asteroid belt is
•
now.
• This was Tiamat from the Sumerian texts.
A celestial collision ‘disturbed and rearranged’ the solar system
•
outlined in the Enuma Elish or Epic of Creation.
Based on the findings on Earth’s moon, the collision occurred some 3.9
•
billion years ago.
In the aftermath of the collision, the solar system acquired the• “Phantom Planet” Nibiru which was later renamed to ‘Marduk’ by the
Babylonians after their god.
• Its orbit is elliptical and not circular.
At its perigee, the point closest to the Sun, it passes between Jupiter
•
and Mars.
The orbit lasts thousands of Earth years. Sitchin applied the Sumerian
• Shar, which equals 3,600 Earth years per one Nibiru orbit. Similar to
many known comets.
Source: Sitchin 1976 & Morbidelli 2003
It is truly remarkable that here we have an author, scholar and scientist in
his own right who started to expose the world to the hidden realities of
our ancient past in the early '70s, and a modern-day astronomer who
virtually quoted Sitchin verbatim, while exposing his own findings some
28 years later.
What is also interesting is the elliptical orbit of the early comets
during the formation of our solar system. To date, comets have puzzled
astronomers, causing many unsubstantiated speculations to surface.
While all of the planets, except Pluto, orbit the Sun in the same general
plane and in the same direction, all moving more or less in a circular
orbit, the comets seem to follow their own paths without obeying any of
the normal rules. Comets move in elliptical orbits that move in random
planes, in the opposite direction to the planets. They are flung deep into
space, sometimes for hundreds and thousands of years in their orbits. The
Enuma Elish tablets, also seem to provide a plausible explanation as to
where the comets originated from and why they behave so strangely. We
will cover this in a closer look at these mysterious clay tablets a little
later. The current theory on comets seems to be supported by
astrophysical evidence that the comets, which eventually settled in the
Oort Cloud, started out on very large elliptical orbits which took them so
deep into space that they were affected by the gravity of other stars. This
caused a fluctuation in the comets’ orbits. Over millions of years this
resulted in the large numbers of comets settling down in a large stableorbit, which basically surrounds our solar system today, and is known as
the Oort Cloud. Some of the comets in this cloud do however remain at
distances far beyond the edge of the solar system, possibly as far as half
way to the nearest star. You can weigh up the evidence and start
formulating your own decisions. If this can happen to a comet, why not to
a planet? The proposed phantom planet must have entered the solar
system pretty much on a similar path to the comets. From the outer edge
of the solar system, turning between Mars and Jupiter, and out across the
paths of all the other planets once more, on its way into deep space. Such
a planet weighing many millions of times as much as a comet, would take
much longer to settle down into a stable orbit around the Sun. So it is
possible that it will continue on its elliptical orbit for a long time to come
before it finds a stable path around the Sun. And if such a planet is on an
orbit of some 3 600 years, it seems to fit that it could have been the
subject of debate and influence on Earth around 5000 BC and subsequent
intervals of 3,600 years before and after.
We have to return briefly to the asteroid belt located between Mars and
Jupiter. Although I casually mentioned that it is probably the remains of a
planet, it should be taken in with an understanding that the knowledge
about this part of our solar back yard is still very speculative.
Astronomers are at odds about what might have caused this phenomenon.
But the asteroid belt certainly adds a great level of intrigue to our very
own solar system. The ancient Sumerians had seven clay tablets on which
is inscribed the Epic of Creation, or as they called it, the Enuma Elish.
The reading of these tablets accompanied their new year celebrations
which seemingly describes the struggle between good and evil. But some
scholars like Zecharia Sitchin have analysed these scripts differently. He
explains them as an historic event which describes the creation of our
Earth and its moon. Our moon is an interesting celestial body, which is
surrounded by much speculation about its origins. Scientists seem to feel
that the moon is too big in relation to Earth to have been created as its
satellite during the formation of the solar system. If one compares the
moon to all the other moons orbiting the planets, we find that the other
moons are considerably smaller in proportion to their planet. In fact, ourmoon is the 5th largest satellite in our solar system, comfortably
comparing with the sizes of the large moons of Jupiter, Saturn and
Neptune. Our moon is simply far too big to have been formed under
similar conditions to the other moons. The physics would not have
allowed such a large satellite to form at the point of creation around a
planet as small as Earth.
The more popular theory on the origin of the moon is known as the
‘Big Splash’. This theory was first introduced by astronomer-artist Bill
Hartmann and his colleague Donald Davis, both at the Planetary Science
Institute, Arizona in 1975. Astronomy Now featured an article in May
2002, which describes the Big Splash as such:
“…the Earth had only recently coalesced in solar orbit when it
suffered a devastating blow. Along came a rogue protoplanet… more
than half the size of the Earth itself and slammed into the proto-
Earth in a glancing impact. The collision vaporised the outer regions
of both worlds to considerable depth, and the core of the impacting
planet sank to the centre of the Earth where the two cores merged
into one. Debris, about 80 per cent of it from the Earth's crust and
mantle, was flung into orbit. Gradually, particles in the orbiting
debris ring began to lump together through agglomeration and then
gravitational accretion, until the mess had all been swept up and a
single, large satellite remained. Only this theory fits the data. But
until recently, even this idea had serious problems, because it left
the Earth and Moon system spinning too madly. Now, this problem
has been largely fixed, and the vast majority of researchers are in
agreement that the Big Splash, ad hoc though it might seem,
represents the true picture.”
I would say that in many ways the ‘Big Splash’ theory resembles the
story of the Enuma Elish described by the Sumerians. What was also
created in that collision was the asteroid belt. Let us focus on this part of
the solar system again. It is amazing that only a tiny fraction of the total
weight of the asteroid belt has been ejected over time. This is mainly
ascribed to the gravitational effect of Jupiter. But it is also possible thatat some stage a giant asteroid was ejected towards the Sun, collided with
Earth, melted much of the rock and metals, and was ejected as a giant
satellite that was caught in Earth’s gravitational orbit, cooled down and
became our moon. That is another theory for the origin of the moon. But
the Sumerians had a different story about the moon’s creation altogether.
The story is interpreted as follows. A planet called Tiamat which existed
in the place of the asteroid belt was involved in a cosmic collision with
an invading planet called Nibiru. This planet was later renamed as
Marduk by the Babylonians. It was caught by the gravitational pull of our
Sun in a long elliptical orbit. It became the 12th planet of our solar
system because the Sumerians counted the moon and Nibiru as part of the
planets. It makes perfect sense why such a planet would be depicted by a
cross, graphically depicting its path and place in history, crossing the
paths of other planets. There are numerous clear references to this planet
in a multitude of clay tablets and cylinder seals from Sumer and other
civilisations dating much further back in time. This planet is always
symbolised by a cross. Both Nibiru and Tiamat had their own moons,
which were involved in a spectacular cosmic collision. The result of all
this was the destruction of Tiamat, which became the asteroid belt; the
creation of the Earth from the largest chunk of Tiamat; and the capturing
of an existing moon of Tiamat or Nibiru, which was trapped by the
gravitational pull of the newly formed Earth. This is why the moon is so
large compared to the size of Earth. Because it was originally a moon of a
much larger planet. It was this fateful event which developed the seasons
and tides on Earth, which contributed to the very unique life forms here
on Earth.
New Scientist devoted the cover of a recent issue to ‘The planet that
stalked the Earth’. In the article the writer offered theories about a “rogue
planet” involved in a cosmic collision. What is most fascinating, is that
the article called the “Phantom Planet” Theia, without any explanation. Is
it possible that the writer was thinking of Tiamat?
But why do we know so little about this planet? For a start, its 3,600-
year orbit is way too long for our short human time frames. We can
hardly relate to stuff that went on 200 years ago on Earth, how could wepossibly come to terms with a planet and a possible civilisation that come
within our reach every 3,600 years? The fact is, that many clues have
been handed down to us over time. Detailed information was captured by
thousands of scribes over thousands of years, capturing their ancient
experiences on a young planet, for future generations to absorb, but our
civilisation has come along and discarded all this knowledge under the
premise that it cannot possibly be true. My grandfather refused to believe
that man walked on the moon and I thought he was very naïve and ill
informed. So let us imagine that there really is such a planet out there, a
‘radiant planet’ called Nibiru, as it is referred to by the Nibiruans in
several ancient inscriptions. Furthermore, if there is life on this planet,
who are the inhabitants, and what effect have they had on our planet
Earth? This is a question which has been asked millions of times by
regular people with inquisitive minds and scientists who have been more
involved in the search for such a Planet X.
During the search for this elusive Planet X, various other objects were
discovered in our distant solar system, in recent times, right on the edge
of the Kuiper belt. Pluto and its moon, Charon, are often thought to be
very large members of the Kuiper belt, referred to as Kuiper Belt Objects
(KBO). The average size of the other KBOs are thought to be between 10
- 50 kilometres in diameter. If one of those had to collide with our
precious Earth, it would have consequences so severe, that it would push
the entire planet with all its life right to the edge of extinction. This belt
is probably the main source of the short-period comets which orbit the
Sun less than every 200 years, like Halley’s Comet. Some other comets
like Kohoutek, are on much larger orbits and astronomers predict that its
orbit can range between 7,500 and 75,000 years. This is pretty much in
line with the kind of thinking behind the orbit of Planet X. When Pluto
was first discovered in 1930, it was often referred to as Planet X but it
soon became clear that this could not be the celestial body that was
exerting such turbulence on Uranus and Neptune. Remember that
scientists discovered that these two planets had disturbances in their
gravity and orbits, but Pluto was simply too small to have such an effect
on them. For this to happen, the body causing these effects had to bemany times the size of Pluto. The debate goes on, some frantically
searching for the lost Planet X, others dismissing it as utter nonsense.
Very recently, another KBO was discovered. Quaoar is 1,250
kilometres in diameter, which is about half the size of Pluto, and is the
largest KBO known to date. A study of the outer solar system suggests
that it may not be a cemetery full of dead, frozen bodies. The study
revealed that this KBO could have been ‘warm’ at some stage in the past.
This supports the theory that planetary processes such as volcanism, can
occur on objects at extreme distances from the Sun. This volcanism could
add support for the existence of planets at such large distances from the
Sun. The Sumerian tablets describe the planet Nibiru as exactly that: “A
radiating planet” which was symbolised by a cross, to indicate the ‘planet
of the crossing’ but also radiation in the form of heat emerging from the
planet. We are told in the clay tablets about the importance of the thick
atmosphere, which protects Nibiru against the long cold periods while
deep in space, when the planet is furthest from the Sun, as well as the hot
periods when it is closest to the Sun. It would ultimately be their
wounded atmosphere that brought the Anunnaki from Nibiru to Earth.
Scientists have found about 1,000 KBOs so far, but little is known
about their composition because they are so distant and faint. However,
the detection of crystalline ice, suggests that Quaoar is, or was, being
heated by something other than the Sun. Could it be the close proximity
of the radiant Nibiru on its occasional fly-by? This was proposed by
David Jewitt of the University of Hawaii in Honolulu and Jane Luu of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Lexington, USA. The two
researchers discovered the first KBO in 1992, and then made these latest
observations. They said that it would have to be an object of substantial
size to have such a profound effect on this KBO. Could this be a real clue
pointing towards a distant giant Planet X?
If we look at the detailed descriptions of the celestial battle between
gods and the collisions of planets which the Enuma Elish (Epic of
Creation) describes so graphically, it sounds almost too fantastical to
believe. It all seems so far back and so far away that we struggle to see its
relevance to our existence at this point in time. But all we have to do islift our eyes at the sky to realise how vulnerable we are to a cosmic
attack. Maybe not by other planets, but by giant asteroids and even
comets. Every so often we hear the news of a large asteroid that passed
close by planet Earth, without us even spotting it, until it had gone by,
unnoticed. This kind of ignorance could cause our extinction in the blink
of an eye and cause a cosmic collision of spectacular proportions, not too
dissimilar to the spectacular events described in the Sumerian tablets.
There are possibly many thousands of giant asteroids flying around the
solar system, many of which come very close to the Earth. These are
called Near-Earth Asteroids (NEA). Eros is an elongated NEA, which is
33 x 13 x 13 kilometres in size. Large enough to destroy our planet and
all life on it. About 250 NEAs have been found so far, but many, many
more exist. The largest known NEA is 1036 Ganymede, with a diameter
of 41 kilometres. According to astronomers there are at least 1000 NEAs
whose diameter is greater than one kilometre and which could do
catastrophic damage to Earth. Even smaller NEAs could cause substantial
destruction if they were to collide with Earth.
This brings us to the dramatic events at Tunguska, Siberia, on the 30th
of June 1908. A meteorite measuring some 90 - 200 metres in diameter
exploded above the ground just before impact. It completely scorched the
snow-covered forest below for some 2,100 square kilometres and
destroyed some 80 million trees. If that was a city, you can just imagine
the drama. But around 65 million years ago there was a far more
devastating collision with planet Earth. A large asteroid about 10
kilometres in diameter crashed into the Earth near the Mexican Yucatan
peninsula and as a result caused the extinction of not only the dinosaurs,
but all land animals over 30 kilograms, and large sections of plant life.
The impact would have penetrated the Earth's crust, scattering dust and
debris into the atmosphere, causing huge fires, volcanic activity,
tsunamis, and severe storms with high winds and even highly acidic rain.
The impact could have resulted in chemical changes in Earth’s
atmosphere, increasing concentrations of sulphuric acid, nitric acid, and
fluoride compounds. What is more, the heat from the impact’s blast
wave, would have incinerated all life in its path. After the impact, dustand debris which were thrust into the atmosphere would have blocked
most of the sunlight for months and lowered the global temperature.
Organisms that could not adapt to the light and temperature changes
would die out. Since plants’ energy is derived from the Sun, they would
likely be the first to be affected by such changes in the climate. Many
families of phytoplankton and plants died out, and the Earth’s oxygen
levels may well have dramatically decreased. This would have affected
oxygen on both land and in the oceans, suffocating those organisms that
were unable to cope with the lower oxygen levels. The drama continued.
Many major changes in the food chain resulted from all of these
environmental upheavals and the herbivores starved soon after the plants
died. Then the carnivores would have had to eat each other, and
eventually also died out. Their large carcasses must have provided
smaller animals with food for quite a while.
This must have surely been one spectacular explosion. To remind us
just how spectacular such cosmic explosions can be, all we have to do is
cast our minds back to the most observed cosmic event in human history.
In 1994, when 21 pieces of the Shoemaker-Levy comet crashed into
Jupiter. The whole world came to a standstill to watch this spectacular
event while all the telescopes were pointed at Jupiter to bring these
dramatic pictures into our living rooms. The largest parts of the comet
caused explosions one million times bigger than all the atomic explosions
ever exploded on Earth put together. In other words, if that comet had hit
Earth, we would not be here today, nor would the planet in all likelihood.
So you see, it is not so hard to visualise a cosmic collision. We are
very fortunate that we have the magic of TV to remind us of the Jovian
event. All that the Sumerians had some 6,000 years ago, were some clay
tablets and a scribe who captured the events in cuneiform writing, instead
of video.
So, now that we have explored our universe, our solar system, comets,
asteroids and cosmic collisions, is there enough content for us to
substantiate the probability of an elusive Planet X in the distant parts of
the solar system, which pays us a visit every 3,600 years or so? We willexplore many more unexplained pieces of the Great Human Puzzle, which
lead me to believe that there is such a planet out there. We will also
discover that this planet is not only linked to our existence here on Earth,
through a strange sequence of events, which included the transfer of the
seeds of life between planets in the very beginning, but also through
genetic manipulation, long after life had developed and evolved on both
Nibiru and Earth. The genetic manipulation that our more evolved cosmic
relatives inflicted on us some 200,000 years ago, is carefully laid out for
us in ancient tablets. I will urge you to once again consider the total
knowledge we have of the cosmos, and how much we seem to learn every
day from our scientists who study the skies. Once you have concluded
that our knowledge is still in its infancy, the obvious conclusion must be
that we simply cannot say. What keeps haunting me, is how carelessly we
discard all this information left behind, by dedicated scribes from another
time when the world was a completely different place. It seems that if
this knowledge does not conform to the way we would like to see our
ancient history, we are not so keen to accept it into our body of
knowledge. To end this chapter on an inspirational note, here are some
statements on the subject of Planet X, by scientists, visionaries and broad
thinkers of the past and present.
“That Mankind’s progression from Palaeolithic (Old Stone Age) to
Mesolithic (Middle Stone Age) to Neolithic (New Stone Age) and
then the great Sumerian civilization, had occurred in intervals of
about 3,600 years is a fact. That Anu visited Earth, approved the
grant of civilization (knowledge, science, technology) to Mankind is
certain. But as I have tried to explain in my recent seminars (though
not yet in a full length book), the visits to Earth and the nearing (at
what is called perihelion) of Nibiru do NOT coincide. This is a point
of immense significance, which those who have only read my first
book somehow ignore.”
(Zecharia Sitchin)
“In the fields of archaeology, geology, and astronomy the last fewyears have brought a vast array of facts to corroborate the claims
that there were physical upheavals of a global character in historical
times; that these catastrophes were caused by extraterrestrial agents;
and that the nature of these agents may be identified. The memory of
the cataclysms was erased, not because of lack of written traditions,
but because of some characteristic process that later caused entire
nations, together with their literate men, to read into these traditions
allegories or metaphors where actually cosmic disturbances were
clearly described.”
(Immanuel Velikovsky)
“Dr. Robert S. Harrington, former head of the US Naval
Observatory, calculated several parameters of Planet X and its orbit.
Harrington started from the perturbations in the orbits of Neptune
and Uranus, knowing that Pluto could not be responsible for them.
The observations he used were supplied by the Nautical Almanac
Office of the US Naval Observatory and go back as far as 1833 for
Uranus and 1846 for Neptune.”
(Harrington Paper)
Albert Einstein remarked that:
“A great many empirical data indicate that at each point of the
Earth’s surface that has been carefully studied, many climatic
changes have taken place, apparently quite suddenly. This is
explicable if the virtually rigid outer crust of the Earth undergoes,
from time to time, extensive displacement...”
(Albert Einstein)