CHAPTER 8
Human Nature
We seem to take so much care to bring our children up in the proper
fashion. Depending on what culture you may come from, the variations
on the word ‘proper’ can be quite extreme, relative to each other’s
dogmas. There are many established cultures throughout the world, each
one with its own peculiar customs, rituals and belief systems. In the last
100 years we have gone from two world wars, a possible third one, to
several localised conflicts like Korea, Vietnam, Afghanistan, Iraq and
other skirmishes which have been described as minor uprisings, like the
one in Haiti. It is quite amazing that despite the pockets of conflict during
the last 50 years of the 20thcentury, we have experienced possibly one of
the most peaceful and tolerant chapters of our human history. I make this
statement with great reservation, because until we have eliminated all
conflict from society we will not be free. This period will however
always be remembered for the collapse of the Soviet Union and turning
the giant communist China into the fastest growing economy in the world
and everyone’s favourite trading partner. But we should be aware that
there are other forms of conflict or aggression than pure outright war. We
have become experts at highly persuasive techniques of convincing others
to follow our lead, while it may not necessarily be to their benefit.
Wealth and military power will allow you to call the shots without having
to fire a single bullet and sometimes we conveniently overlook such
incidents. It is either that our violent genes have mutated into
‘clandestine’ violent genes, or we have attained new genes which have
mutated into displaying their violent nature in more subtle ways.
In his latest book entitled DNA - The Secret of Life one of the founders
of the DNA, James Watson, writes: “Understanding genetics is not just
understanding why we look like our parents. It is also about coming togrips with some of Humankind’s oldest enemies: the flaws in our genes
that cause genetic disease.”
This statement feeds my argument superbly. Why should our genome
be so incomplete and so full of flaws if we have been evolving for
millions of years? It just does not add up and it indirectly supports the
theory of our DNA being tampered with early in our existence. I refer
frequently to the ‘violent gene’ and the ‘greed gene’ because I firmly
believe they truly exist in our genetic makeup. The evidence is all around
us. If we behave in a certain way, there must be something driving it from
within. And our DNA is the master programme which predetermines all
our characteristics. Just as we cannot refute the fact that someone has
blue eyes, when it is clearly visible, we cannot refute the fact that we
display violent behaviour, when it is also clearly visible. And yet there is
the other side of our character, the benevolent and peaceful traits, which
must have a group of ‘genes’ that control such traits. What drives this
striving towards harmony by a growing number of earthlings is a
mystery, since we have now established that the ‘violent’ gene is well
embedded in our DNA. We have seen a dramatic shift towards tolerance
between the global cultures, where only 100 years ago imperialism was
still the major quest of the global powers, annihilating weaker cultures in
the name of god and king. But while society has been narrowing the gap
in some sectors, a growing gap in other sectors has been developing.
Religious intolerance is a truly worrying factor to world peace because
with religion comes a virtually indestructible force that drives it from
within, fanaticism! As long as certain groups of people believe that they
occupy a moral and religious high ground over other groups, we are
staring a recipe for disaster in the face. All the efforts by the politicians
to create a stable global trading environment will mean absolutely
nothing as long as we have the threat of religious fanatical violence.
Unless we can point out a new religious road of moderation to the hoards
of religious faithful in the world, there is a great risk that this whole issue
is possibly still coming to a violent head.
There is another global development which drives the ‘violent’ genes
in some of us in much more subtle ways. Economic warfare. The gapbetween the rich and the poor is the most worrying aspect of globalisation
and it is not diminishing, it is growing ever wider. While you have one
group or one nation achieving greatness at the expense of another, there
will never be a state of harmony on Earth. As I pointed out earlier, our
brain is an immensely complex organ, which we may never come to
understand completely. The brain seems to play a kind of interface role
between the physical and the spiritual aspects of our being. It is the
computer which is driven by an extremely well-developed software
package called the genome. But the brain computer can only function at
the rate at which the software package allows it to and the software
requires constant upgrading. This upgrading can only come through the
action of DNA. Many scientists have made daring pronouncements about
the amount of brain capacity which we humans use, but the truth of the
matter is that the brain has a capacity that we cannot begin to estimate.
As advanced as it is, our brain can only perform the functions that have
been programmed into the genetic software. The more advanced the
software, the more amazing things the brain can do. And just like your
computer software constantly updates itself from some remote Microsoft
reservoir, your genome software constantly strives to update itself from
the reservoir of our evolving DNA. There is also however a constant
tussle between ‘nature’ versus ‘nurture’. While some of us are being
nurtured into becoming business leaders, others who grow up in less
privileged societies are ‘naturally’ marginalised to remain the working
class which provides the ‘slaves’ who drive the global machine.
We cannot escape our past, which is pretty much built on exploration,
invasions, occupation, domination, crusades and warfare, during which
the stronger culture would simply attack the weaker one as part of its
unquestionable right to expand its area of influence. But just because we
know the past and are starting to understand the complex effects of
conflict, does not mean we know how to deal with this genetic defect, as
James Watson so correctly points out. Our genetic defects do not only
effect our physical health, but our mental state. It is this mental state of
ours which is controlled by our ‘faulty’ DNA which drives us into
conflict situations. For us to be able to deal effectively with our insatiableneed for conflict, we must know exactly where we come from and why
we are the way we are, so that there may be no speculation, as this kind of
uncertainty becomes an underlying justification for our behaviour.
Unfortunately, all the effort expended on our human psychological
shortcomings has been based on speculative assumptions of our human
origins. The complexity of human nature, therefore, goes back to our
creation. African-American sociologists claim that it will take their
society another several hundred years to overcome the underlying effects
of slavery. And this was just a temporary oppression of one group by
another without any surgical or genetic manipulation. Just imagine the
damage that was handed to humanity at its creation by severely pruning
its genetic capacity. The volatile path of human history has left us with
scars that we need to heal in an attempt to begin to understand our human
nature.
On a personal level, I have always been an eternal optimist, a
messenger of positive energy, finding the good in everyone and
constantly creating. Creating what, you may ask? Creating anything. It
seems that when humans are busy doing something creative, their minds
tap into the non-violent portion of the genome. An example can be as
basic as working in the garden, planting some flowers. The levels of
therapy derived from gardening are well documented. It goes on to other
simple examples like building a tree house or fixing an old chair. It can
get as mundane as writing a shopping list. The creative process seems to
override the activity of the violent gene. There are incredible stories from
war situations where the opposing armies would stop to play a game of
soccer, before returning to killing each other. This pop-philosophy causes
a dilemma however. What about the people who create weapons of war?
What happens to the relationship between creative genes and violent
genes in their system? Is it that they are so absorbed by the creative
process of actually creating something new that they are completely
removed from the effects of their creation? Or, can it be that the violent
gene has become so cunning inside of us, that it supports and drives the
creative gene to feed its own survival needs? Some of these philosophies
have been explored in great detail under the guise of the ‘selfish gene’.But these are all answers we will find with time. As for now, at least we
are raising the questions, being allowed to explore by our evolved and
enlightened society, to examine new boundaries which would have had us
burnt at the stake a few hundred years ago.
It is such a great pity that Communism was corrupted by a group of
power hungry individuals who used the communal benefits to feed their
own greed. The behaviour of the fallen Communist leaders flew right in
the face of their gospel. I believe that under more evolved human
conditions, maybe some time in the future, this doctrine of sharing could
be more useful to the human race. Because in its theoretical make up, it is
a kind of utopian answer to many global problems. I will most probably
be shouted down by millions of capitalists but I still believe that the
original idea of sharing has a lot to do with our hidden genetic structure.
The people of southern Africa have a communal philosophy they call
‘ubuntu’, which is based on the principles of sharing and caring for the
whole village or community. This concept predates the communistic
ideals by many thousands of years and could actually be its early origins.
It seems to have worked very successfully for thousands of years, until
the tribes were invaded by the colonialists and forced to break up their
ancient traditions in favour of democracy and capitalism. Was this a
smart or a stupid move? You be the judge, but it seems to me that the
survival of the global commune may become dependent on some of the
simple philosophies of the oldest cultures on Earth. Capitalism is a recipe
for disaster, but the wealthy and powerful corporations who dominate the
world will never admit this for as long as they are in the driving seat.
They will continue to exploit and enslave large amounts of people for as
long as they are on top. Then they will eventually be toppled by another
group that will do exactly the same. We have to ask ourselves: where is
this all leading to?
A perfect genome will have no need for violence, greed, vanity and all
the other characteristics which have caused human suffering for so long.
So, as we evolve and we need less and less to feed the materialistic
reservoirs of our psyche, we will become more comfortable with the
global concept of sharing? Once again, this sharing thing is not reallynew to humanity. We are involved in communal sharing on various
scales: in our homes, extended families and even offices, but to be taken
to its extreme, we would have to eliminate any form of material reward
from the global equation.
This concept must be completely unthinkable to anyone in economics
or the financial markets, because as they see it, the world is driven by
economics, in other words, money. The only problem is that money
makes money and in the end it gets us nowhere. The pursuit of money has
been a major driving factor behind many wars. The simple expression
‘the rich get richer and the poor get babies’ is very real and very
dangerous for future prospects of human survival, because the babies of
the poor become the slaves of global corporations in the modern world.
What used to be brutal wars waged by thousands of men in bloody
hand to hand combat in open fields, has been replaced by global
terrorism, which is probably more sinister and difficult to guard against.
But the largest threat to our survival is ‘economic terrorism’. This
relative newcomer to global domination has replaced nuclear superiority
and has been waged quietly from behind closed doors of the giant
multinationals against the smaller unsuspecting nations. After all, it is
much wiser and more profitable to invade a country by taking over its
economic assets and owning its wealth and natural resources, than
blowing them up first, before you take them over. So, in essence nothing
has changed since Alexander the Great or Attila the Hun. Only our
methodology has changed. The violent gene is still in all of us. While
some of us have learnt to suppress it somehow, possibly through our own
evolutionary process, a new more menacing gene has taken centre stage.
The greed gene.
If you ask any regular person on the street, they will tell you that they
want peace and harmony in the world but many people are still prepared
to fight for peace. You have probably seen those T-shirts that say
‘fighting for peace is like fucking for virginity’. You can’t get much
closer to the truth than that. But standing firmly juxtaposed to all the
violence and greed in the world is a seemingly endless river of goodwill.
But because the media have become obsessed with blood, guts and gore,we hardly ever get to hear about the good news in the world. On an
average day there is far more good news to cover in the world than there
is bad news, but that is not the choice of the editors. This is a very strange
aspect of human nature which must have its roots in some macabre
genetic dysfunction we do not understand yet. But editors seem to be
convinced that ‘good news does not sell’. I have had this debate with a
number of TV and radio producers who tend to dismiss my suggestions of
‘good news content’ with large amounts of arrogance, as if they knew
exactly what the average man on the street wants to consume in the news.
Well, I believe they have become slaves to the violent and greed genes
driving our character. They have settled into the safe zone of using
violent sensationalism to sell their news. They are not brave enough to
push the boundaries of their own genetic makeup and explore the deeper
needs of the global society. How much longer will the media survive on
feeding us such negative news? How much longer will the average person
put up with consuming and digesting the sensationalism dished up to us
as ‘crucial’ knowledge without which we could not function?
The amount of goodwill and benevolence that people display on a daily
basis is truly staggering, but it largely goes unnoticed in the face of the
negative news being shoved down our throats. From Mother Theresa to
social workers and volunteers in conflict situations; the Red Cross; the
Red Crescent; a multitude of aid organisations and charity institutions;
animal rights groups; orphan support groups; soup kitchens; night
shelters; a seemingly endless list of NGOs with some cause at heart, there
is so much goodwill in the world it is quite simply overwhelming. The
concept of sharing seems to be deeply entrenched in human culture. By
the time you see a disaster on TV, some international benevolent
organisation has already arrived to deal with the situation. One of my
favourite quotes is “do unto others as you would have them do unto you”.
I always felt that somehow this should be one of the principal
philosophies we should subscribe to in our turbulent state of mind. The
recognition of good and bad is clearly visible in the eyes of little children
when you tell them stories about evil characters, they burst into tears very
quickly. Instinctively, they don’t like the bad guys and they want thegood to conquer evil. You never really have to explain the difference
between good and bad, they seem to instinctively know who the bad guy
is and who the good guy is. And yet some grow up choosing a violent
path and others do not. Is it social conditioning together with a
programmed violent gene that causes some children to grow up into
monsters? How can a pure little baby who cries when the evil stepmother
raises her voice at Cinderella, turn into a global dictator who does not
count his victims by the dozen, but by the million? The fact that there
have been peacemakers like Mahatma Gandhi and Nelson Mandela, who
have inspired most of the world to engage in dialogue rather than war, has
been an inspiring closure to the 20th century. This is all juicy fodder for
the preachers of ‘nature vs nurture’ theories. Are we a product of our
environment, or are we a product of our DNA programme?
Psychologists have been speculating for years about the triggers for
violence among humans. There have been fantastic theories, like the
effect of your parents, your friends, your neighbourhood, the climate,
disease, the stars and a host of other extrinsic factors that play an
important part in our behaviour. That may very well be the case, but they
are just the triggers that stimulate the violent gene inside. The chain
reaction which follows the stimulation of the violent genes will differ
from person to person. This is where it becomes even more complex. If
we have been created with a restricted genome, our creator must have
done so purposefully. It is clear from the Sumerian tablets that our
makers had an advanced knowledge of science and medical procedure.
But it does not mean that they, themselves, had a perfect genome. And if
we are genetic offshoots from a more advanced ‘human’ species who
settled on Earth in the distant past, we must retain parts of their genetic
structure. The fact that we have reached the capacity to contemplate these
once unimaginable prospects, is a clear sign that there is much more to
this fairytale than first meets the uninformed mind. Our level of
development in the 21stcentury must be very close to that of the Anunnaki
astronauts when they first arrived on Earth. My guess is that in a 100
years or so, we will be ready to absorb the full truth of our ancestry andthe authentic origins of the human race. The evidence will be more
compelling, the fearful grip of religious dogma will be more fragmented
and people will be searching for real answers rather than the mumblings
of conservative power-mongers.
The giant gap between the ‘HAVES’ and the ‘HAVE NOTS’ is bigger
than ever before. Just compare the giant social chasm separating a rocket
scientist who is trying to land a probe on Mars, and the situation of a
homeless person contemplating to rob someone for ten bucks. The
disparity between humans is staggering. And if we were all born equal,
we have certainly done everything in our power to change that. A very
disturbing aspect of human nature which must have deep-seated roots
somewhere in our genome as well. Are some humans more valuable than
others? If our bodies are disposable but our souls are not, should we not
do away with the imperfect bodies, keeping only a few on this planet,
until such time that a more perfect genetically created body has evolved?
At that point we could allow humanity to multiply to their hearts’
content, because their DNA will not allow us to do anything damaging to
either the planet or Humankind.
Just look at our insatiable need to explore. We have done quite well in
30 years since the first Viking space probes were launched on a planetary
expedition into the depths of our solar system. We have done very well in
such a short space of time. We received photographic images of all our
planets, before the probe finally left our solar system and disappeared
into deep space en route to distant stars. This obsessive desire to explore
and conquer is very strong in our genes and as I point out in other
chapters, a quest of humanity since our creation. We can trace it back as
far as the Garden of Eden. It all started there, when Adam disobeyed his
god and wanted to try a new experience. He just had to know more,
explore, push the boundaries, without even knowing why he was doing so.
It was very simply a natural response which was dictated to him from
deep inside his DNA. Poor guy, the father of all humans and he himself
was receiving mixed messages from the very start! No wonder we are all
so confused.
Since then, we have a much better understanding of our place in theuniverse. We now know that we are not the centre of creation, something
that I was still taught as a boy in Grade One, and we have had physical
interaction with many of the planets around us. So the next step in our
quest to conquer, would clearly be settling on another planet. The
fortunate thing is that there are no intelligent creatures living on any of
the local planets. We would surely be faced with a moral dilemma if we
found an advanced creature living on one of them. What would we do? It
all depends if the creature was more or less advanced than we are, I
suppose. This would play a major role in the way we dealt with them.
So let us imagine that the creatures on Mars are more or less as
evolved as we are. The first thing that would happen is our natural
instinct for defence would probably kick in. We would display high levels
of concern that we may be attacked and colonised by our planetary
neighbours. So we would face a number of options. Reach out a hand of
friendship; attack; or sit back and wait. It is often said that history has
taught us nothing, and this is where we will most likely prove it all over
again. In conflict situations, a surprise attack will normally catch your
opponent off-guard or even better, unprepared. Pre-emptive strikes are
justified based on the pronouncements of people like George W. Bush
and many of his disciples. So, we would probably do the latter and forget
the lessons from history. Once we have surprised the Martian people and
subdued them into subservience, we would occupy them and immediately
start to import our global culture. But what culture would it be? American
culture of course. After all they are paying most of the costs, so they will
have first option to introduce whatever culture they feel fit. What if the
USA acts alone in this invasion of Mars and occupies the Martians
against the will of the rest of the world? Suddenly we will all be at risk of
an attack by a Martian force anytime in the future. Can you see the deeply
rooted signs of a violent gene? I know this is just a silly hypothetical
example but it is not that far removed from what is happening on Earth!
But as far as we know there is no advanced intelligent life on Mars, so the
settlement and colonisation would not have such serious consequences,
yet. It is however quite probable that this kind of invasion happened here
on Earth some 445,000 years ago. We will expose all the evidence leftbehind on thousands of Sumerian clay tablets. From the annals of human
history, we can also deduce that the consequences of invasions can be
catastrophic.
Many books have been written on the possibility of human settlement
on Mars. Strangely enough it does not seem to be as insurmountable as
we originally thought. Knowing the human hunger for exploration we will
send explorers to settle on Mars at some stage in the future. Many
brilliant minds have been compiling the necessary steps for human life to
flourish there. The three most important criteria are: an atmosphere
which protects the settlers against cosmic radiation and contains the
necessary gases for us to breathe without a support mechanism; water and
food. The latest announcement by NASA scientists predicts that we could
create a liveable atmosphere within 200 years. There have been brilliant
proposals to achieve all of them and it will probably happen in time to
come. So let’s just imagine for a moment that if we manage to populate
Mars, solve the oxygen and water problems and start active communities
on this neighbouring planet, one of the first resources we will need is
labour. While robots may be able to perform some of the tasks, human
involvement will be unavoidable in the form of actual people who can do
all the physical work, which we will need to create a stable sustainable
community on Mars. Building structures, reservoirs, roads, mining, food
preparation, healthcare and so on.
If we did not face the moral dilemma imposed on us by religion, would
we rather wait for a number of years to get some help from Earth, or
would we seek a different solution? The journey to Mars takes more than
three years at present speeds of space ships and would only be able to
deliver a very small number of people. In that case, would we rather
consider the possibility of cloning men and women who are properly
educated and skilled in the various tasks needed on Mars? Will the same
moral rules that prohibit human cloning on Earth also apply on Mars? If
we could get the emotion and the religious interference out of the
equation, cloning would surely be a realistic option. After all, the babies
will be well cared for, educated and protected by the Martian authority.
Everything will be provided for them. At a point in the future, when thenew Martian humans have matured and are capable of procreating
themselves, we would have introduced our family values that we hold so
dear on Earth. So you see, cloning does not have to be such a bad thing. It
can help us to advance into space, without the constant physical
intervention from Earth. It would make the space pioneers self-sufficient
and independent. And like a general in a war situation, the general on
Mars would most likely decide on the most effective action to deal with
the situation, without having to wait for instructions from his leader back
home. Will this situation arise on Mars? Maybe… possibly… probably. It
all depends on how impressive the advancement in space travel will be in
the next two to three decades. If we can break the bonds of gravity, come
to understand and use electromagnetic science more effectively; replace
archaic combustion power with a new propulsion system, all of this is
possible.
The question remains, how will we deal with the labour problem on the
new planets we conquer? In this lies the human moral dilemma, which is
very closely linked to our own origins and evolution. The human nature
that shapes us and our thoughts; the drive for exploration and invention;
the shortcomings of our genome and our imminent understanding of it,
all play a part. We are so close to seeing the whole story of humanity but
there are still some hurdles to cross. It is an incredible story which will
liberate us from our moral imprisonment and also free us from the cradle
of humanity, planet Earth. All of this is programmed into our DNA, each
and every one of us. All we need to do is to exhibit patience and restraint
as we decode our human programme and unlock the dormant genes that
will liberate our spirits.
Let us go back to Mars. We have now successfully landed, set up a
base, and spent a few years – with the help of advanced science – to speed
up the development of an atmosphere, generating oxygen from the carbon
dioxide trapped under the surface and we’ve even brought up water from
the underground ice. We also planted thousands if not millions of trees
and other vegetation, like grasses, which include cereal, maize, barley,
oats, wheat and more. They all grow well with the fertiliser we created
from nitrogen and phosphate, and the irrigation system keeps it all hunkydory. We then face the first dilemma of labour. Suddenly things get out
of hand and start to grow and evolve around us on Mars. We have an
urgent need for additional manpower. But we soon overcome this
dilemma by taking the necessary steps to deal with the situation, and we
create a whole army of cloned babies. They are bought up in comfort and
loved by their minders and creators, providing everything they need while
educating them in the necessary skills they will need to perform
specialised functions from the early age of 16. As the years go by we
‘create’ more environmentally-adapted cloned human babies to supply
the needs of the Martian expansion. Mating among the cloned adults is
strictly prohibited, because of unforeseen physical problems and
controlling the numbers of humans in the colony. In fact, the clones were
originally created without the sex chromosome to prevent them from
multiplying on their own. But after two decades we realise that it is
quicker to allow the clones to mate among themselves under controlled
conditions. A quick genetic procedure allows them to procreate on their
own for some years. We teach them the importance of monogamy and
chastity and family values. They experience the meaning of parenthood
and responsibility for the first time. Suddenly we have a new Martian
race of humans who were born of Martian parents and all their
experiences are restricted to their Martian history. But these Martians
were not created as slaves, but as equal humans. So the community and
population on Mars grow and their needs grow along with them. The rare
precious metals which are being extracted and shipped back to Earth,
become a highly sought-after commodity among Martians and they start
to adorn themselves with it as a symbol of their achievement. As time
goes by this metal becomes so desirable that it becomes the local
currency. Martians everywhere start to trade with this currency so that it
begins to affect the supply to mother Earth. Soon after this, the trade with
the metal is outlawed and it goes underground. Within a short space of
time, a new elite Martian mafia-type organisation emerges which starts to
control much of the power, while criminal activity surges. With this
sudden arrival of material and monetary desires of the Martians, comes a
whole new and most serious dilemma. There are now 12,875 people onMars and complex social problems start to creep into all spheres of life.
The most worrying is the emergence of social classes, skewing the
balance of equality. Since this was originally a government-funded
expedition, all the people who were enrolled played a vital and integral
part in the mission to Mars. They all received the same remuneration,
while all their daily needs and requirements on Mars were provided for
by the expedition funds. The original team worked smoothly, without any
conflict, as they each had a special function to fulfil, and each member
was a crucial part of the team. But suddenly this all changed, and a new
worker class emerged. Should the worker be treated the same as the first
members of the team? Or are they to be regarded as lesser ‘equals’, since
they were created for more menial work? And how will they be
remunerated? With food, clothing, entertainment, free sporting facilities
and other things that will satisfy their needs while they live happily in the
growing Martian community? Or do they get given some form of
monetary remuneration which is deemed to be proportional to the job
they perform? With the one option you will create a ‘Communist’
structure where everyone is equal and expected to contribute towards the
benefit of the whole group ; but the other option is to plant the seeds of a
capitalist system which comes with its own instant set of problems of
greed and ownership. Which is the lesser of the two evils? With the first
system it may happen that pretty soon some individuals will start to drag
their feet, not performing at their peak and causing dissatisfaction among
the other workers who have to make up for their co-worker’s laziness.
The other system will create instant class structures where some get
richer while the others get disgruntled with their lot. Corruption and
greed will permeate the communities with a long list of undesirable
social side effects ...
Now I would like you to take a deep breath and attempt to answer this
question. If it is possible that we as the human race are on the verge of
colonising other planets, is it not possible, given the very murky
surroundings of our ancestry, that we ourselves have come through a
similar set of events here on Earth? Is there not a real case for examining
the evidence from prehistory to present a case based on more scientificand physical evidence, rather than the man-made religions that keep the
human race trapped in a cycle of religious dogma, guilt and fear?
Fear is a powerful tool which has been used by dictators for eternity.
The fear of punishment, physical harm, torture and gruesome death has
haunted humanity since the beginning. But the fear of spiritual torture is
equally strong. The insane fear of going to hell after death, where you
will burn for eternity, is very real to billions of people on Earth today.
The fear that was instilled in us by our maker was the blueprint which
was followed by political leaders and religious leaders ever since. These
powerful tools have not only been used by gruesome dictators, but also by
the more cunning leaders of the modern world as a clever tool of
propaganda. The global media have given world leaders instant access to
their people. With this access they can create and control a relentless
propaganda campaign, so subtle that often their strongest critics do not
recognise it. I am always amazed how the giants like BBC and CNN can
discriminate or choose sides so blatantly, when they refer to “the Israeli
soldiers” and in the same sentence they call their opponents “Palestinian
militants or terrorists”. In an instant they legitimise the one group while
reducing their opponents to a distasteful group of barbarians. If I recall
correctly, that is not the way they referred to the ANC when Nelson
Mandela was part of this militant group of revolutionaries. They were
called ‘freedom fighters’ with a just cause to reclaim their land. So what
is going on in the Middle East? Have the world's media decided that the
Palestinians are just a bunch of brutal barbarians who deserve to be
annihilated? Whether we like it or not, this subtle play on words will
eventually influence our personal judgment, as the years of repetition
wear down our ability to distinguish truth from propaganda. George W.
Bush used the media very skilfully after the 9/11 attack to make the
American people fearful of almost everything. He used the media to
make them believe that everyone was a threat and everyone wanted to
attack them, invade them and overthrow them. A clever manoeuvre to
unite his people behind him and follow blindly as he leads them into a
new global conflict of cultural domination. This instilled fear suddenly
justified all acts of war against other countries based purely on thepropaganda of the US government. The really sad thing is that the poor
American people are completely oblivious to this development which has
completely consumed their lives. They are happy to pay their taxes,
strengthen their army, and invade the whole world to prevent them from
possibly engaging in any future acts of aggression against the ‘land of the
free’. Does this sound familiar? Is this not very close to what Alexander
the Great and the Roman Empire did 2,300 years ago? If you add the
element of economic warfare waged by the largest economy on the rest of
the world, you have a very grim picture of how civilised the modern
world really is. The truth is, that we are in a constant state of conflict of
some kind. The most prevalent and the most dangerous is the growing
economic conflict. Until recently there was only one player with total
control of global economics. But through an unexpected sequence of
events, the impossible has occurred and placed the former economic giant
under threat. The sleeping dragon has awakened, and through the sheer
numbers of people, China has shifted the balance of economic power
dramatically in a few short years.
So what is the outcome of all this military and economic warfare?
There is no outcome; warfare will continue to be the biggest threat to the
human race and it will continue to cause unimaginable suffering amongst
people everywhere. It seems that there is nothing we can do to temper the
violent gene. Until we start to come to grips with genetic engineering,
until we actually located this gene and its related genes, or until we
actually evolve a little more. Together with its newfound friend, the
‘greed’ gene, they make a devastating slice of DNA, so powerful, with so
much control over humanity, that it will be very difficult to fight it with
our minds. And even though many will tell you that the mind can do
anything, the programme in our genes reigns supreme. There has to be a
latent ‘violent’ gene hidden in all our genomes. This ‘violent’ gene and
the ‘greed’ gene, are stimulated by a variety of triggers, to come out of
hiding and get activated. These triggers depend on various factors that
influence our lives as we grow, and possibly even the activity of other
genes. There is a possibility that it is not really a violent gene, but just
one element of a cluster of genes that has a completely different functionwhen working together. And just like a computer will malfunction if the
software programme is not complete, a specific gene will function
improperly when it has been disturbed by extrinsic factors. This too, we
will discover as our knowledge of the genome increases.
George Soros is possibly the world’s wealthiest and most active
philanthropist. He has made immense wealth and at the same time has
been involved in continuous donor funding activity all over the world. He
is truly a strange phenomenon, because to make money and build an
empire like he has, takes a specific type of character which is normally
associated with drive, commitment, cunning, ruthlessness, being
relentless and often cruel, but also a visionary and a good strategist. The
kind of characteristics displayed by military leaders. It makes sense that
the fight for economic victory follows a parallel path. But George Soros
is better known for his benevolent attributes. The amount of money he
spends on financial support for needy countries and thousands of other
charitable institutions around the world is truly inspiring. This is a very
unusual characteristic which seems to be growing amongst the high
profile wealthy individuals globally. But Soros still leads the pack by a
long way. The curious thing is his ancestry. Being of Greek origin places
him very close to the main centre of activity of the Anunnaki of the
ancient times. Just humour me for a while as I try to unravel the possible
genetic links to our makers. The main residences and palaces of the
Anunnaki were in the Middle East when they first arrived. This is where
they settled and ruled from. This is also where they made certain crucial
decisions that were then implemented. Like the decision to create a
human-like clone to perform all the hard labour on Earth. If the first
humans were created in this part of the world, using a mixture of
Anunnaki DNA and Homo erectus DNA to create a new species, it means
that there must have been a period when the Middle East had a growing
population of the new human species, evolving as they performed menial
tasks for their masters and gods. It is also likely, given the human nature
of promiscuity, that the “sons of the Nefilim saw the daughters of man”
and they had sex with them, creating a whole new genetic pool which was
more advanced than the Homo sapiens ‘slave species’. Is it thereforepossible that there is a genetically more advanced group of people in the
Middle East who have a more advanced genome in certain respects?
These may be the wealthy but benevolent individuals who have evolved
faster and started to feel the effects of newly released genes which the
rest of us are yet to experience. Is this also a possible reason why all over
the world we have great people who emerge out of the morass of human
conflict to shine a light of new wisdom and a new vision, as they lead by
example? Gandhi and Mandela being just two examples. Could they be
more evolved genetically because their ancestors had more Anunnaki
blood in their bodies than human blood?
It is curious that some wealthy people are overcome by guilt of some
sort once they have amassed large amounts of wealth. I suppose it is the
realisation that you can’t take it with you, which leads to all kinds of
internal moral clashes. We have been given some 80 years on average to
do something with our lives. Since we have been liberated from the ‘slave
species’ status into which we were originally created, we face a dilemma.
What do we do with all this time on Earth. I predict in this book that as
our genome evolves, it allows our mind to interact on different levels
with the world around us. It stands to reason that an evolved mind will
interact differently with the universal spirit, or God with a big ‘G’ as I
like to call it. This relationship between human and the divine will
unquestionably impact on the way those individuals behave and how it
changes their opinions about worldly issues facing Humankind. But for
the mean time, while various structures which were imposed on us as a
primitive species still prevail, we are slowly unlocking the chains of
bondage and inventing new pastimes, hobbies and knowledge.
It is incredible how certain sectors of the global economy have
influenced the way we behave, dress, speak, court, make love, and engage
in war. The past century is filled with a number of fantastic examples of
this impressionable human trait.
Let’s take a look at the tobacco industry for example. Before the
advent of the moving pictures, smoking was not such a ‘hip’ thing to do.
Suddenly the silver screen was filled with stars who all held long sexy
cigarettes in their hands. Lighting a cigarette became a signature scene invirtually every movie as directors fell in love with the way their cameras
captured the swirling smoke. Within a few short years smoking was
associated with glitz and glamour, and everyone wanted to look as cool as
their favourite movie star. Personal health was not on their mind, their
image was the main thing. Is it possible that the cigarette companies may
have had something to do with those early movies? Using the power of
mass media to attract new consumers?
Soap operas have had such a huge impact on the behaviour of people
that it absolutely boggles the mind. Millions upon millions of people
across the world gather every day to worship at the TV, watching their
favourite soapie religiously. It has become a ‘pseudo religion’ for some
and they will not go out at night before getting their dose of surrealism.
At the risk of sounding sexist, I have heard confessions from women who
claim that they plan their days based on the storyline in their favourite
soapie. It affects their moods, their needs, their relationships and their
lives. Is that not a clear sign of a disturbed civilisation in search of
reason? So where does this disturbed global population come from?
As we uncover the dusty tablets of wisdom left behind by our ancient
ancestors, we will begin to see the clear evidence that we are the reluctant
by-product of an advanced group of beings who populated the Earth some
443,000 years ago. The evidence is overwhelming that they created
humans as a ‘primitive worker’ to ease their workload in the gold mines,
essentially creating the first slaves and entrenching our obsession with
gold. We will discover with absolute amazement how closely our
behaviour resembles that of the Anunnaki who created us. Because we
were endowed with much of their DNA, we should not be surprised that
we are showing the same character flaws, which eventually destroyed
their own unity on Earth. We look like them, we behave like them, and
slowly our DNA is evolving to its original configuration as possessed by
our makers, the Anunnaki. In essence, we are the aliens on this planet
called Earth.