CHAPTER 9
Gold: The endless obsession
I have been asked several times throughout my life what I would
change if I had a chance to do it all again. Maybe I was very lucky or
ignorant or possibly even arrogant, but I would change nothing. My
childhood days were filled with so much laughter, non-stop fun and
adventure, growing up on the gold fields of South Africa, that I cannot
imagine having it any other way. For those who have never had the
pleasure of visiting the gold fields of the West Rand, South Africa, do not
be disappointed, because the fields are not actually filled with gold. The
name does however suggest a landscape filled with shiny, glistening
mounds of gold as far as the eye can see. All you have to do is reach out
and take it. On the contrary, the West Rand is a rather flat grassland, full
of mielie (maize) fields, whirlwinds, dust, afternoon thunderstorms and
sinkholes. There is a small range of hills that seems to run all the way
from Johannesburg to Potchefstroom for about 150 kilometres. As you
travel this two-hour stretch of road, you come across your typical mining
settlements, which have between 200 and 5,000 residents. They have
great names like Zuurbekom, Westonaria, Randfontein, Venterspost,
Waterpan, Hills Haven, Libanon, Fochville and the famous Carletonville.
The one common feature that links them all together is the array of mine
shafts. Small ones, giant ones, concrete ones and steel ones. Sink holes
are a fascinating phenomenon in these parts, mainly as a result of man’s
hunger for gold. As the mining activity underground drains the water, it
allows the dolomite rock formations to become dry and brittle. With time
and pressure, they eventually cave in and cause sinkholes on the surface
with devastating effects to humans. These sinkholes can range from a few
metres across to a kilometre across and their depth normally varies from
hole to hole. The Venterspost Golf Course, where I mastered my enviablehandicap of 22, was built around such a sinkhole featuring some daunting
drives that force you to clear the hole instead of water. On many
occasions we would be forced to venture down into the giant sinkhole in
search of lost balls. More often than not it was worth the trek, as the
booty provided us with golfing riches every 12-year-old could only dream
of… Balls for Africa.
Everything on the West Rand revolved around gold which had a knock-
on effect into every possible industry imaginable. The villages were, and
are still today, designed to provide the families of mine workers with
everything they need to keep them occupied. This obviously applied only
to the white miners, while the black migrant labour-force was crammed
into men's hostels that developed very disturbing socio-economic
problems with time. But for the fortunate ones, it was swimming, golf,
tennis, squash, bowls, badminton, jukskei, club house activity and
constant social events. This was like paradise for any growing child.
What more did we need? Every mining home had the spoils of their
underground toil on display, normally consisting of a range of gold ore
rocks, clearly showing the rich sediment arteries of gold and other
metals. These rocks would inevitably be above the fireplace, in the
middle of the table holding down the crochet cloth or even converted into
a home-made ashtray. It's incredible to think that as much as 60% of the
modern world's gold came from this area which stretches about 200
kilometres in diameter and also includes large parts of the Free State.
While this geographic location may not have been terribly relevant to me
and all the other gold miners in the '70s, it would certainly start to raise
many crucial questions in my mind by the mid '90s, when it started to
become clear that the so-called ‘Cradle of Humankind’ was located right
here in southern Africa. Is it not curious that it was here in southern
Africa where the Sumerian tablets claim that most of the original gold
mining activity took place, shortly after the Anunnaki first arrived on
Earth some 450,000 years ago? And according to the tablets, it is also
here, at the southern tip of Africa where the newly created species was
put to work some 200,000 years later when the ‘Adamu’ was first created.
Should we be surprised that these amazing historic facts all seem to tieup? Yes we should, because we know by now that history has taught us
nothing, so once again we look at these incredible coincidences and we
refuse to believe what they are telling us.
But back on the West Rand in 1970, to the hundreds of thousands of
people growing up in this mining industry, it was all they knew, and it
was all they needed. To the point that I personally always felt sorry for
the kids in the city. I could never understand what all the ‘other people’
were doing living in cities and other parts of the country. What could be
more important than gold? What else was there? Our lives were so
consumed by the activities surrounding the gold mining industry, it was
truly difficult to imagine a life other than that. After all, our fathers were
the guys responsible for getting the shiny metal out of the ground – the
bars of gold which were the envy of the whole world. I distinctly
remember the sadness that surrounded underground rock falls resulting in
deaths of people you knew very well. Like my friend's father who died
underground in the pursuit of gold, or people swallowed up by sinkholes
while playing tennis on a Sunday morning. But while there were regular
tragedies, we somehow justified it and believed that it was all okay,
because we were part of the big plan to provide the world with gold. Life
simply carried on and every day more trucks filled with gold would leave
our backyard to be delivered to someone, somewhere in the distant
corners of the world.
Looking back at this scenario some 30 years later, there seems to be
very little difference between my father's underground toil for the shiny
yellow metal, and the original primitive miners who worked the gold
mines at the dawn of humanity. They both came into this world with a
finite number of years to live, performed their duty, and made some
invisible god richer. The similarity between the human slave species at
the dawn of humanity and the modern mine worker is quite startling. If
we examine the Sumerian texts and see how the new ‘primitive worker’
was treated by his ‘gods’ while working the mines, performing the hard
labour for his masters while being provided with everything they needed
in the Garden of Eden, we realise that nothing much has changed in
thousands of years.The primitive workers must have also wondered where all this shiny
metal was going to. It would be whisked away by the gods never to be
seen again. Why was it so important to the gods? What made this yellow
metal so sought-after? Why were the workers not allowed to keep any of
it… or own it? Why were they punished so severely if they kept any of it?
Why was so much effort put into its recovery? Where did it all disappear
to? Who was using it… and for what? But these questions were probably
never answered in ancient times. While we may think differently today,
do we really know where all the gold goes to? And who actually ends up
using it for what purpose? We think we know… we have all the scientific
answers and the economic indicators thrown at us daily providing us with
a warped sense of confidence because the ‘gold market is stable’.
Explanations of what happens to all the precious metals on Earth fills the
pages of economic dailies, but I still suspect that there is much more to
the story of gold which is not known nor understood by the well informed
human race in the 21stcentury. It feels as if there is a greater monster
somewhere in the sky consuming much of the precious metal spoils from
Earth.
Why are we so obsessed with gold? What caused this sudden
prehistoric obsession? Why was it gold and not some other precious
metal? Why is it that we can trace this obsession all the way back to the
cradle of Humankind? The sudden emergence of civilisation some 11,000
years BC went hand in hand with agriculture, structured communities and
domestication of animals by the new ‘thinking man’. There seems to be
no sensible explanation for this. Anthropologists are perplexed by man's
virtual disappearance or slow regression before the great flood of some
13,000 years ago, until they suddenly re-emerged with a new vigour, and
as if out of nowhere, civilisation emerged in the Near East. It was from
there that all these suddenly acquired skills spread around the world.
These are now accepted statistics by most scholars. They had hardly
appeared from the dregs of the flood, and already they had gold, and their
fascination with the pale metal was as visible as it is today.
One other thing which however still perplexes historians, is the speedat which a wide variety of new agricultural produce kept coming out of
the Near East, starting from around 8000 BC or even earlier. It was as if
the Near East had become some kind of a botanical incubator, constantly
producing newly domesticated plant species. How was it possible that
primitive man, who was still living in caves, suddenly gained such
advanced knowledge? This time has been described as the end of the
Palaeolithic period or Old Stone Age, and the beginning of the Middle
Stone Age or Mesolithic period. It means that man was still completely
consumed by stone in all his day-to-day activity. His dwelling was made
from stone, villages were protected by stone walls, his tools were made
from stone, he covered his dead with stones and so on. So who was
holding his hand, dragging him towards civilisation, showing him the
way, imparting knowledge as quickly as man could absorb it? There
seems to be a clear link between Noah's landing on fertile land, planting
the first vines and the emergence of civilisation in the Near East. It is
very curious that this primitive man, while emerging from the Stone Age,
already possessed advanced knowledge of refining and processing gold,
even for thousands of years leading up to this point.
Was the same hand that helped man with agriculture behind his gold
mining exploits? It certainly seems like a plausible explanation. Or do
you still believe that primitive man just slowly evolved into knowing all
about this advanced technology? I could possibly buy the alluvial gold
theory, because it is reasonably easy to find it in rivers, sieve the mud,
retrieve the gold and polish it. Alluvial gold nuggets vary from very
small to reasonably large and often shine in the water, which would have
attracted the attention of many a passer-by. But the problem is that many
of the prehistoric mining sites were actually ore installations. This
complicates things a bit. Even the subtle difference in the appearance of
gold in its alluvial state, compared to the way it looks like in ore
sediments, takes a trained eye to recognise. I simply cannot imagine
primitive man walking along some 12,000 years ago, stubbing his toe on
a rock, which led to the inadvertent discovery of ore gold mining. He saw
that the rock was different from others. On closer inspection he identified
gold sediments in the rock. He instinctively knew that if he crushed therock he could extract gold from it. But first he had to go through the
following process:
“Sodium cyanide solution is allowed to leach through a pile of
finely-ground rock that has proven to contain gold and silver, and is
then collected as gold cyanide and silver cyanide solution. Zinc is
added to the solution, precipitating out zinc, silver and gold metals.
The zinc is removed with sulphuric acid, leaving a silver and gold
amalgam that may be further processed into the individual metals.
The cyanide technique is very simple and straightforward to apply,
and popular in areas where mine tailings may contain surprisingly
large quantities of valuable metals. There can be significant
environmental damage caused by the use of this technique due to the
high toxicity presented by the cyanide itself.”
(Source: Wikipedia.org)
I have a real problem believing that primitive man engaged in this
process of his own accord long before he even knew about agriculture and
other basic aspects of civilisation. The only known reference to this kind
of knowledge exists in the Sumerian tablets. Do we take them seriously
or do we discard the information captured on these tablets? Many
historians have chosen to discard this knowledge and by doing so have
denied Humankind a true glimpse at the inexplicable behaviour of ancient
humans. Why has there been this fanatical obsession with gold since the
earliest days of humanity? Why is this obsession continuing today? When
did man first decide that gold made a great necklace and started adorning
himself with the shiny metal? What were early man's real reasons or
motivations? Many people believe the answer is simple, they will tell you
that it is the rarity of gold that makes it so desirable. But it somehow does
not answer the question satisfactorily. Why did primitive man need gold
in the first place when there were so many other shinier objects to adorn
himself with? What made gold so rare and more desirable than all the
other worldly shiny stones and metals? Besides the alluvial gold which
may have been exhausted very quickly, who taught man to extract metalfrom ore?
The history of gold is a fascinating tale. As far back as we can go,
humans have always been obsessed with it. The gold rush of the 1850s;
the Vatican; the Spanish Conquistadores; the Vikings of the Dark Ages;
the Romans; the Greeks; the Egyptians; the Mayas; Incas; Olmecs;
Toltecs; the Mesopotamians; Akkadians; Sumerians and the mysterious
Anunnaki were all obsessed with gold. Gold has been the obsession of
kings for ever. It was also the chosen item of sacrifice by ‘god’ and many
of the other ancient gods, when demanding offerings from their human
subjects. It has been a symbol of wealth and success in most religions and
the Old Testament is filled with references to gold in a multitude of
situations. This includes the strict instructions from God to Moses, about
the dimensions of the Ark of the Covenant and the materials that were to
be used in its construction. The following instructions come directly from
Exodus 37.
They are to make an Ark of acacia wood, 45 inches long, 27 inches
•
wide, and 27 inches high.
Overlay it with pure gold; overlay it both inside and out. Also make a
•
gold moulding all around it.
Cast four gold rings for it and place [them] on its four feet; two rings
•
on one side and two rings on the other side.
• Make poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold.
Insert the poles into the rings on the sides of the Ark in order to carry
•
the Ark with them.
The poles are to remain in the rings of the Ark; they must not be
•
removed from it.
• Put the [tablets of the] testimony that I will give you into the Ark.
• Make a mercy seat of pure gold, 45 inches long and 27 inches wide.
Make two cherubim of gold; make them of hammered work at the two
•
ends of the mercy seat.
Make one cherub at one end and one cherub at the other end. Make the
•
cherubim of one piece with the mercy seat at its two ends.The cherubim are to have wings spread out above, covering the mercy
• seat with their wings, and are to face one another. The faces of the
cherubim should be toward the mercy seat.
Set the mercy seat on top of the Ark and put the testimony that I will
•
give you into the Ark.
I will meet with you there above the mercy seat, between the two
• cherubim that are over the Ark of the testimony; I will speak with you
from there about all that I command you regarding the Israelites.
These are pretty detailed instructions. If I had to receive a plan like this
today, I would be quite curious to know why the sizes and materials had
to be so specific, if all that this fancy ‘chest’ was supposedly for, was to
carry some valuables from Johannesburg to Bloemfontein. Is it possible
that instead of just being a container for the future commandments, the
Ark was also some kind of communication device? After all, God said to
Moses, “I will meet with you there above the mercy seat, between the two
cherubim that are over the Ark of the Testimony; I will speak with you
from there about all that I command you regarding the Israelites.” Surely
the all-powerful-god could speak to Moses anywhere? Rather than
confining him to a designated seat with his head between suspicious
‘cherubim’! Were the extended ‘poles’ not just for carrying the devices,
but also antennae to receive transmitted messages? Were the ‘cherubim’
some sort of speaker system between which Moses had to sit to hear
God's message? It is all very curious and highly suspicious once you
remove the religious emotion from it. The historic reality is that gold has
played a very unusual role in the entire history of Humankind, often
crossing the line to become religious practice or rituals. Why would God
have such an insatiable appetite for gold? Before we speculate any further
about the possible reasons surrounding such a divine hunger for gold, let
us first take a look at the metal and what the real fuss is all about. What
makes this metal so special?
Gold is a remarkable metal with an unparalleled combination of
chemical and physical properties, which make it invaluable in a wide
range of everyday applications essential to our modern life. Manythousands of everyday appliances require gold to ensure a smooth
performance for long periods. Gold is virtually indestructible and is
completely recyclable and immune to the effects of air, water, and
oxygen. Gold will not tarnish, rust or corrode. These properties make
gold a vital component in many medical, industrial, and electrical
applications.
Gold is the most non-reactive of all metals. It never reacts with
oxygen, that is why it will not rust or tarnish. The golden mask in the
tomb of Tutankhamen looked as brilliant when it was unearthed in 1922
as when it was entombed in 1,352 BC. Gold is among the most
electrically conductive of all metals and is able to convey even a tiny
electrical current in temperatures varying from -55°Celsius to
+200°Celsius. It is therefore a vital component in computers and
telecommunication equipment. It is the most ductile of all metals,
allowing it to be drawn out into tiny wires or threads without breaking. A
single ounce (28.4grams) of gold can be drawn into a wire eight
kilometres long. It can be shaped and extended into extraordinarily thin
sheets. One ounce of gold can be hammered into a 12-metre-square sheet.
Gold is the most reflective material of infrared energy. This means that
high purity gold reflects up to 99% of infrared rays. This makes gold
ideal for heat and radiation reflection for astronauts and fire-fighters. But
at the same time, gold is also an excellent conductor of thermal energy or
heat. It is used to transfer heat away from delicate instruments. For this
reason, a 35% gold alloy is used in the main engine nozzle of the Space
Shuttle, where temperatures can reach 3,300°Celsius.
So what did ‘god’ have up his sleeve when he gave Moses such precise
instructions? Did someone capture all those instructions in writing or
were some of the more intricate details omitted simply because the writer
could not really understand the finer details? Why were the ancient
‘gods’and not only humans so obsessed with gold? When you start
weighing up all the little coincidences, and you pay attention to the
Sumerians, they begin to make a lot of sense. Most people still carry the
naïve view that man simply stumbled upon gold by accident, it became a
tradable commodity admired by kings, eventually becoming the globalcurrency driving stock markets up and down. I just cannot buy this
simplistic view which is largely based on our current perception of the
metal in the 21stcentury. The history of gold mining has very sketchy
roots which are as murky as the rest of ancient human history. The oldest
tangible written documentation we have available to us from very ancient
history, are the Sumerian clay tablets and seals, but these seem to be
rejected by many resistant scholars. The last decade however, has seen a
giant and radical swing towards accrediting these tablets with some
merit. As more and more tablets have been verified and translated,
mavericks like Zecharia Sitchin have received more serious acclaim, and
the tablets started to make a real impact on the ‘holy grail’ of science
with their outlandish theories on our ancient ancestors and creators. So if
we accept the contents of the Sumerian tablets, we will have to accept the
fact that gold mining goes back several hundred thousand years, long
before any of us could fathom. But as we will see, it all fits perfectly into
the Great Human Puzzle and provides us with riveting information to
dispel all the rubbish which we have been indoctrinated with over
hundreds of years. You will have to be brave to face the real truth,
because it is not what the global establishments would like you to
believe. This leaves me personally with only one conclusion. The ancient
‘gods’ who populated the world and enslaved Humankind may still be
active among us in ways which we cannot comprehend, not allowing
knowledge to spread, keeping their firm grip through religious oppression
over their ‘slave species’.
There are very clear references in the Sumerian tablets to the
introduction of kingships by the ‘gods’, the role of high priests as the
carriers of the ‘gods’ instructions’ to their people, and the ongoing
mining activities in search of the precious metal that brought the
Anunnaki to Earth in the first place. The priests and kings were often
summonsed to a meeting with ‘god’ during which they would receive
very specific instructions to convey to their people. This was a common
event in the Old Testament, with people like Abraham and Moses, being
just two of the more famous examples of how god interacted with man,giving him explicit instructions. Why is this not happening today? Or
have we just become too wise for the conniving ‘gods’ of biblical times?
In the ‘Story of Humankind’chapter we will cover in great detail the
creation of the ‘Adamu’ and the ‘primitive slave worker’ who had to toil
in the mines of southern Africa digging for gold, for their gods. But I
trust that I should set the scene in order to explain some of the
fundamentals derived from thousands of Sumerian tablets which form the
foundation of the claims I make in this chapter.
The slow and steady translation of Sumerian tablets gives us a peek
into ancient human history for the very first time and turns everything we
have been taught on its head. They give an extended written account of
the entire history of the rise of civilisations on Earth, but it is not what
most would expect. And yet when you evaluate all the stuff compiled in
this book, it will hopefully make as much sense to you as it does to me.
Here is a short outline of the complex story of Humankind, as told in the
Sumerian tablets, merely to serve as a guide to explain some statements
in this chapter:
The Anunnaki were astronauts and explorers who settled on Earth some
443,000 years ago under the command of Anu, hence the Anunnaki. His
two sons Enlil and Enki were given the control of their new space base.
They came in search of gold to help mend their planet Nibiru's failing
ozone layer and atmosphere. Over time they sent as many as 600
explorers and workers to Earth, set up a multitude of mining operations in
southern Africa and a space command centre in the Near East at Eridu,
the oldest settlement on Earth. After some time and complaints from
those Anunnaki who had to toil in the mines, they created a clone, which
was a mixture of their DNA with that of the Homo erectus creature that
lived on Earth. They called this first ‘primitive worker’ ‘Adamu’ and
after some time they created a female partner for him to procreate,
instead of being carried by surrogate Anunnaki females. “Let us create a
Lulu, a primitive worker, the hardship work to take over… By the mark
of our essence to fashion him.” (Translation from Sumerian tablet.)
The new slave species became highly sought after by the Anunnaki in
the Near East and so began to toil there as well, away from his Africancradle. The Anunnaki also had a base established on Mars from where
they could send larger shipments because of the lower gravity. This was
before the cosmic events that caused the great flood on Earth and also
caused Mars to lose its atmosphere. Those who lived on Mars were called
Igigi, but the cosmic events forced the Igigi to desert the planet and
return to Earth. The sons of the Anunnaki and the Igigi were referred to as
the Nefilim in the book of Genesis and other literature. ‘Those who
descended to Earth from heaven’. Even Genesis tells us about these
Nefilim who came to Earth and ‘saw that the daughters of man were
beautiful and had children with them’. This created a whole new species
of humans called the Aryans who lived separately from the rest and
influenced future civilisations to a great extent. They were followers of
Marduk, who we will hear a lot more of later. All these activities
happened for very sound reasons. The planet Nibiru is on a 3,600 year
orbit around the Sun, just like the orbit of many comets. On one of its
approaches to the Sun, Nibiru came unusually close to Earth and Mars,
causing great geological upheavals that resulted in the Great Flood some
13,000 years ago. At the same time the presence of Nibiru also caused
Mars' atmosphere to be ‘sucked away’. The Anunnaki saw this
approaching global catastrophe as an opportunity to wipe out the slave
species that they created and which had grown to very large numbers by
then. The slave species had become a big problem that was not going
away. They needed constant supervision, care and feeding like little
helpless children. They were becoming unruly and some even began to
develop thoughts of independence, breaking the bonds of labour and
slavery in the mines. But the biggest problem for Enlil was that some of
the Nefilim were having children with the human females, creating a
whole new sub-species and exacerbating the problem. At the original
point of creation of the ‘Adamu’ there was much disagreement between
the two commanding brothers. Enlil was completely opposed to the
creation of a new species and now he had the perfect opportunity by
allowing a natural disaster to eliminate the human problem. But Enki who
was the creator of Humankind, told some of his own offspring to save
themselves in a submersible boat. The rest is part of human history. Butthe close proximity of Earth to Nibiru, had a devastating effect on the
large planet Nibiru as well, once again disturbing its atmosphere. Just
when the Anunnaki thought they had saved their planet Nibiru and were
going home, the gold mining had to resume. As fate would have it, they
were grateful that some humans survived. But this time they would give
them knowledge and teach them all they needed to know about
civilisation and survival, while they slowly began to be absorbed into the
extended family of gods. The gods divided the world into a number of
regions, allocating each region to one of the more senior Anunnaki
children on Earth. Disagreements and greed began to consume the ruling
gods, with one of them called Marduk/Ra/Amun, proclaiming himself to
be the ‘one god above all’. He expanded his influence over the world
against the will of the rest of the Anunnaki gods, causing a standoff.
Marduk seems to be the ‘one god’ of the Old Testament who began to
prohibit the worship of other gods by humans. He was also referred to as
the ‘god of vengeance’ who about 2,500 years BC began to force humans
everywhere to accept him as the only god. He promised reward and
sympathy to those who obeyed him and great punishment to those who
did not. He also began to promise immortality to his followers, the
Pharaohs being the major and first benefactors of his promises. It is for
these reasons that we see the unusual obsession with the afterlife among
the Egyptian kings. The rest of the Anunnaki decided that they had to act
decisively and with extreme force against Marduk. This was the time that
involved Sodom and Gomorrah in the Bible. The destruction was violent
and widespread, with dire consequences. But somehow, Marduk escaped
the onslaught, and the events only made him more feared and worshipped
by the surviving humans. And so his related extended family in northern
Mesopotamia, the Aryans, invaded the lands to the east and Europe to the
west, conquering humans everywhere and imposing their Aryan
supremacy on them. And such is the remaining status quo in the world
today.
I must tell you that I am not making any of this up in a moment of
fictional insanity. As ridiculous as these tales may sound, they are no
more ridiculous than what is happening in the world today. But you canbe the judge of the evidence presented, and you can decide whether you
want to remain a slave species, or whether you want to begin exploring
the new options presented to us as we unearth more and more prehistoric
artefacts which tell us a completely different story about our human
ancestry to the one we have all been told.
Let us go back to the obsession with gold. The ‘slave species’ were
toiling in the mines oblivious of their exact place in the greater scheme of
things. They knew that this was the only thing required of them. They
lived in compounds not dissimilar to those used on South African mines
even today. Everything was provided for the slaves, but they had no
choice, no freedom, no future other than toiling in mines. They were born
into mining slavery and they died as slaves on the mines. But there must
have been slaves who rebelled and escaped into the dense African bush,
to form small family units, learning to survive as hunter gatherers. The
Khoi-San people were most likely some of those. There came a time
when some slaves were allowed to leave the mine compounds and live in
the African wild, probably when they became old and fragile, not able to
do the hard labour they were intended for. These groups of early humans
formed small units and tribes, developing their own distinct African
cultures which were filled with mythological gods and tales that are
difficult for historians to understand. But when seen from this new
perspective it makes perfect sense why African mythology and their
religions are so different from the rest to the world. Because it was here
in Africa where the first humans were created, they lived and slaved in
isolation from the other emerging human communities, and they
established their own unique cultures, highly influenced by their master
‘gods’. There was very little contact between these early humans in
Africa and the rest of the world, where interbreeding was taking place
between humans and the offspring of the Anunnaki, giving rise to the
Aryans of the north. It is possible that there may even have been a mutiny
by the ‘slave species’ against their enslavement, after some 100,000 years
of toiling.
After the mutiny of the slave species, when many were allowed to
leave their mining compounds, the mining continued while many of theslaves tried to live in newly-formed communities and survive without the
help of their gods. Could this relationship between the slaves and
Anunnaki be echoed in the religious structures of today? Could the
Anunnaki still be holding a firm grip on human activity especially around
the production of gold in modern times? Many of the secret societies
throughout history have been traced way back to the origin of humanity
and the so-called ‘Brotherhood of the Snake’. And the conspiracy theories
keep coming. The great thing about conspiracy theories is that that's
exactly what they remain. But the fact that our human origin is in
question; that the role of gold in the world has dubious origins; the
questionable role which the church and its priests have played in the
hording of gold and wealth, all point to possible conspiracies so deep that
there may be more to them than meets the sober mind. Just to
demonstrate how confused historians are about the origins of gold and its
possible meaning to early humans, here are some random extracts of what
has been said about the origins of gold:
“Gold was probably the first metal known to the early hominids that,
on finding it as nuggets and spangles in the soils and stream sands,
were undoubtedly attracted by its intrinsic beauty, great
malleability, and virtual indestructibility.”
I find this statement utterly ridiculous. Why would a soft metal have any
value to primitive hominid, ape-like creatures, when their preoccupation
was with survival, food and shelter? But the Anunnaki needed gold and
they needed a worker to get the gold from the ground.
“During the stone ages the metal appears to have taken on a sacred
quality because of its enduring character and immortality, being
worn initially probably as amulets and later fashioned into religious
objects and idols.”
All very well, but why would gold, rather than any of the other metals or
precious stones take on such an importance? There is no justifiable
reason for such behaviour by primitive early humans, unless they were
imitating someone, placing value on the metal for some reason.“By the time of the early Indus, Sumerian, and Egyptian civilisations
(3000-2000 BC) gold had not only retained its sacred quality but had
become the symbol of wealth and social rank.”
Exactly! By this time humans were given civilisation by their gods and
gold was established as the ‘property of the gods’. This is very well
documented by the Conquistadores in Mesoamerica. They were
repeatedly told by the natives that all the gold ‘belonged to the gods’. In
biblical times god would reward his obedient human followers in various
ways. Gold was one of those rewards, because it was revered by humans,
as a divine metal. Any human who was allowed to keep gold or given
gold by the gods as a form of reward, was admired by everyone. They
would be in possession of something ‘godly’ and ‘divine’, which was a
huge social privilege, increasing the desire and demand for gold.
“Homer (circa 1000 BC) writes in the Iliad and Odyssey, the epic
poems of ancient Greece, describing gold repeatedly both as a sign
of wealth among mortals and as a symbol of splendour among the
immortals.”
There we have it. Homer had similar views on the issue with gold. Why
did he know these things, which our modern intellectuals have reduced to
mythological mumbo-jumbo not to be taken seriously? The following
statement immediately supports my disillusion with modern teachers of
human history. This seems to be a commonly accepted view among
scholars, which I find extremely arrogant, short-sighted and outright
ignorant. They should read more, open their eyes and stop filling the
minds of our children with half-truths and utter rubbish, which is mostly
regurgitated historical rhetoric not worthy of the paper it is written on.
“Early references to the first discovery of gold are essentially
legendary or mythical. The Chronicum Alexandrinum (AD 628)
ascribes its discovery of gold to Mercury, the Roman god of
merchandise and merchants, the son of Jupiter, or to Pisus. Similar
legends and myths concerning the initial discovery of gold are
referred to in the ancient literature of the Hindus (the Vedas) as well
as in that of the ancient Chinese and other peoples.”What more do we need in the form of support for what we read in the
Sumerian tablets? Obviously Alexander's historians knew more than our
historians do today, and they must have been familiar with the extensive
library at Alexandria with its millions of books, lost to our modern
historians. They did not hesitate calling the deities ‘gods’ while today's
historians very quickly reduce them to ‘mythological’ figures.
Here is a little more of what history sources have to say about gold:
“The discovery of the element we call gold is lost in antiquity.” This is
not true. Here is an extract from a Sumerian tablet translated by Zecharia
Sitchin: “Let gold from the waters be obtained, let it for salvation on
Nibiru be tested.”
This was the first ever reference to gold in our ancient prehistory. Words
spoken by Anu, the king of Nibiru, before they dispatched the Anunnaki
to Earth to retrieve the gold. Do we just ignore these scripts and regard
them as nonsense? Why would prehistoric men be so obsessed with gold
that they wrote such elaborate stories about the metal? I contest that it
would have been relevant, only if gold played a crucial role in their
survival, and so it did. It was the main reason and the only reason why the
Anunnaki were on Earth, and the only reason Humankind was created.
“The principal source of gold in primitive times was undoubtedly
stream placers, although there is considerable evidence in certain
gold belts in Egypt, India and other places. The Eluvial and alluvial
placers were worked in the crudest manner by panning or the
simplest form of sluicing. Exposed parts of friable veins were
simply dug out, trenched, or pitted with the crudest of tools, stone
hammers, antler picks, bone and wooden shovels. Only rarely were
simple shafts, and drifts attempted and then only in the soft rocks of
the zone of oxidation. Fire-setting was probably employed by the
ancient Egyptians, Semites, Indians, and others to break up the hard
quartz veins.”
Why would early humans want to break up gold-bearing rock, if they did
not know how to extract gold from ore? They must have known theprocedure otherwise they would not even have recognised gold deposits
in ore. And we have evidence that they did use fire to break up the ore, so
they must have known the rest of the complex procedure, including
smelting at above 700° Celsius. But why be so surprised, the Sumerian
tablets tell us exactly how they went about obtaining gold from ore and
how they smelted it. “How a new metal from stones was extracted… to a
place of melting and refining metals… ” the gold was taken.
Throughout the history of Humankind, where there was evidence of
gold, new settlements erupted, bringing prosperity to some and
desperation to others. In fact, it seems that if there was no evidence of
gold from the earliest days of antiquity, civilisation would only show
signs of development much later. All the earliest human settlements seem
to go hand-in-hand with gold.
“Both small and large deposits that showed free gold visibly or in
the pan were worked by slaves, convicts, and prisoners of war who
were assigned by those in authority to the gold placers and mines.”
The term ‘mine’ is very relevant here, as most mine shafts are dug for the
purpose of ore mining. And why would they have dug mine shafts like the
ones in southern Africa 50,000 years ago and more, if they had no
knowledge of ore mining?
“Early references to gold mining appear in ancient Egyptian codes,
on stelae, in pictograms and inscriptions in the tombs of the
Pharaohs. The most ancient geological map known, is from about the
time of Seti I (circa 1320 BC) It shows roads, miners' houses, gold
mines, quarries, auriferous mountains, and so on. The ancient
Sumerian, Akkadian, Assyrian, and Babylonian civilisations utilized
gold extensively, but their sources of the precious metal are
relatively uncertain.”
This is not true! The clay tablets give us many references to gold,
outlining the mining operations, processing, smelting and usage. But the
historians who write such tripe about the history of gold are probably the
same people who give the Egyptians credit for mining gold, but in thesame sentence discredit that which the Egyptians held so dear… their
gods… who gave them all the knowledge and wisdom, including that of
mining for gold.
“References to gold and gold mining are numerous in the Old
Testament of the Hebrews. Six sources of gold are mentioned in the
Old Testament. They are Havilah, Ophir, Sheba, Midian, Uphaz, and
Parvaim. The exact locations of all six have given rise to much
speculation. Some authorities claim that all six sources are Arabian;
others have suggested locations much farther afield.”
If only they would pay attention to those mystical ancient scriptures
left behind for us to assimilate. But unfortunately those had been
classified as mythology, so no sober historian could possibly admit that
such fiction had influenced their professional opinion. There are very
clear and detailed references to southern Africa or the “Abzu” as the
place where the first gold in the world came from. It also happens to be
where the first ‘primitive worker’ was put to work to mine the gold, and
it also happens to be the Cradle of Humankind. Is this all not a little too
coincidental?
There has been much speculation as to the location of Ophir, the
fabulously rich land, filled with gold from which King Solomon's navy
brought more than 34 metric tons of the metal to his kingdom. Kings
10:22 in the Old Testament mentions cargoes of sandalwood trees,
precious stones, ivory, apes, and peacocks, suggesting the
circumnavigation of Africa. Various references to Tarshish suggest that
the gold may have come from Tharsis, a mining town in Spain.
Other favourite spots are East Africa and southern Africa, principally
Zimbabwe, especially the ruins of Great Zimbabwe. The whole layout,
design of the main residence, staff quarters, the art of building a stone
structure without mortar, would have made a perfect master's residence
for the ‘god’ Enki in the ‘Abzu’, as the clay tablets call it. Could this
have been the head office of King Solomon's mines? Who occupied it
thousands of years after Enki “built his place in the Abzu”. There is no
shortage of mines in southern Africa and over the past 200 years ofexploration over 500 ruins have been discovered in what was called the
land of Monomotapa. This ancient land stretched from the coast of
Mozambique, inland and included modern-day Zimbabwe. Various
authorities such as Bruce, Huet, Quartremere and Guillain, as well as the
great majority of later writers on the Zimbabwe ruins, favour the claims
that Monomotapa (Zimbabwe) was the Ophir of scripture. There is also a
clear distinction between a much ‘older’ Great Zimbabwe and all the
newer structures which were built in much later times. Could this be a
repetition of the Pyramid symptom? The original structures were built by
the prehistoric Anunnaki under the leadership of Enki, as his home in the
Abzu (southern African mining region). Thousands of years later, just as
in the case of the pyramids, kings of the biblical times, Phoenicians and
Himyarites built their own new structures, which do not quite meet the
style and quality of the original? In the ‘Adapted Excerpts’ from The
Ancient Ruins of Rhodesia by R.N. Hall and W.G. Neal, 1904, we read
about a “first or older” Zimbabwe and a more recent one. The scholars
write that “massive structures which, while following generally the first
Zimbabwe type, have been built in three or more high-terraced tiers
rising to the summit of the hills, surrounding them, and sometimes
completely covering them.” They tell us that "this ‘wedding cake"
feature, as it has been termed, is absent in all Zimbabwe ruins built in the
first period. Yet all these later Zimbabwe ruins present all the evidence of
having been erected by nature-worshippers, and contain the orientated
temple “open to heaven,” the sacred circle, the conical towers “the high
places”, the monoliths, and every evidence of Phallic worship. This class
of Zimbabwe is represented, among many others, by Dhlo-dhlo, Regina,
Meteme, and Khami people.
The Phoenician connection to the ruins is striking. The monuments,
stone carvings and statues found in Zimbabwe are identical in style to
those which are predominant in Sardinia and other ancient Near Eastern
cultures, including the worship of the god Baal. Explorers Neal and Hall
were leading this drive at the turn of the century. They continue
explaining that there is a “marvellous similarity” between these later
Zimbabwes and many of the three thousand nauraghes, or terracedfortresses, which cover the island of Sardinia. “In both the Rhodesian and
Sardinian erections evidences of nature-worship are abundant.” The age
of the Sardinian nauraghes goes back to the Bronze Age, around 3,500 -
1,500 BC, and scholars like Geyard write: “I have no hesitation in
considering the numerous round edifices of Sardinia, which are known
under the name of nauraghes, as monuments of the worship of Baal.” The
Zimbabwean ruins of the latter period resemble such monuments to the
god Baal, who was worshiped between 2,500 and 200 BC all over the
Near East and Egypt. This gives us a clear link between the advanced
civilisations of the north and the distant lands of gold in the south,
referred to as Ophir during biblical times.
This is an incredible breakthrough. There is constant reference to the
‘First Zimbabwe’ and ‘Latter Zimbabwe’ which can be distinguished by
their architecture and worshipping of gods. Not only do we have strong
evidence to support that King Solomon's mines were indeed located in
southern Africa, but suddenly we have tangible evidence that there were
two distinct civilisations in Zimbabwe, separated by thousands of years.
The more recent or ‘Latter Zimbabwe’ was active between 2,000 -
200BC. They built their shrines and dwellings the same way as their
brothers up north in the Near East, praying to the same god Baal; and
another, much older prehistoric civilisation referred to by scholars as
‘First Zimbabwe’. Those from prehistory date back to over 50,000 years
as shown by archaeologist Peter Beaumont with his discovery of ancient
mines in Swaziland, Southern Africa. But the Sumerian tablets tell us that
these African mines date back as far as 200,000 years. Too incredible to
digest? There is now a visible line connecting ancient mythology with
more recent history, finding a natural meeting place. The issue of the
‘shrines and temples’ is crucial here. While the ‘latter’ biblical
civilisations in Ophir (Zimbabwe) were worshipping their gods, the ‘First
Zimbabwean’ cultures had no need or knowledge about worshipping any
gods. It was the original Anunnaki who created the mines with their new
slave species as the first ever gold miners on Earth. They had no need for
temples and worshiping, because that kind of ritual had only been
introduced to Humankind around 4,000 to 6,000 BC, some 190,000 yearslater. But then came the kings and mariners of the north around 2,500 BC
and they built their dwellings as lesser copies of the original Anunnaki
structures, and immediately plonked their shrines for worshipping right
next door. After all, they would not want to upset the ‘god of vengeance’
otherwise they would have been punished. There are many other curious
similarities like names of rivers and places that also add to the Great
Zimbabwe theory.
Ancient navigational plans of Phoenician King Necho some 610 years
BC, setting out from the Red Sea to the south eastern coast of Africa or
Monomotapa, is just one indication that the land of Ophir was actually in
this part of the world. But the support for these theories has been growing
for decades and the evidence seems to be irrefutable. There was really no
other part of the world which could have provided King Solomon and the
Queen of Sheba with so much gold during those days of history. While
many of the ancient mines in Monomotapa may have been filled with soil
and mud during the Great Flood, some have survived to tell the tale of
prehistoric mining in the cradle of Humankind.
Other suggestions for the site of King Solomon's mines are southern
Turkey in the Taurus Mountains, northwest Saudi Arabia and possibly the
Eldorado of the Hebrews. Nubia, in the Sudan, was a great source of gold
for the Egyptians. It just so happens that ‘Nub’ as in Nubia, means gold in
ancient Egyptian. During the time of Queen Hatshepsut (1,503-1,482 BC)
and later, the Egyptian navy brought great amounts of gold and stibnite
from the areas in Punt to Egypt. The two other sources of gold mentioned
in the Old Testament were Uphaz (Jeremiah 10:9 and Daniel 10:5) and
Parvaim (II Chronicles 3:6). Where could those places have possibly
been? So far historians have not been able to identify any of the
references.
While the talk of gold is ever-present in the Old Testament, references
to geological sites of gold and silver are relatively rare. In the book of
Job it states: “Surely there is a vein for the silver, and a place for gold
where they find it.”
(Job 28: 1)Who are the “they” he mentions? Why would they be so obsessed with
gold?
Southern India has long been known for its golden riches, where in
ancient times loads of gold was mined. In his Bibliotheca Historica of the
1st century BC, Diodorus Siculus wrote that in India “the earth contains
rich underground veins of many kinds, including many of silver and
gold... ” Once again, it points to knowledge of ore mining and not just the
commonly accepted alluvial methods.
In China, gold was mined and utilised during the earliest of times,
including the Shang civilisation (1,800-1,027 BC) of the Huang-Ho River.
Gold mining was probably introduced into Korea around 1,122 BC by the
followers of Ki-ja, who migrated from China. From Korea, the various
methods of mining for gold were taken to Japan, probably as early as 660
BC (Bromehead, 1942).
“Gold was known to the early Amerindians, but the metal was not
held in high regard in the period… Later, during the first centuries
of the Christian era, gold assumed much greater importance in the
Olmec, Zapotec, Mayan, Aztec, and other civilisations of Mexico
and Mesoamerica and in the Inca civilisation of South America.”
This is not true. The Andean and Mesoamerican cultures have been
obsessed with gold for thousands of years, most of their oral and written
legends refer to gold which could go back as far as 12,000 BC. These
civilisations continue to tell us in their literature that the “gold belongs to
the gods”. This would have made gold very important in their everyday
lives and it was also the reason why their civilisations emerged.
“Gold was not prized by the Amerindians of Canada and the United
States, and the aborigines of Australia seem not to have paid any
attention to the precious metal.”
Could this have been because the Anunnaki did not find large deposits of
gold in those areas to attract their attention? And therefore any human
settlement for the purposes of mining gold only took place much later?
Or their obsession with gold only reached them much later, once itbecame a ‘human’ obsession, inherited from the gods?
The past few pages were just a tiny taste of the confusion that
surrounds the origins of gold on our planet. But the confusion and
contradiction get much worse. I therefore have no problem whatsoever in
turning to other scientific records that may be regarded as inferior or
esoteric by many scholars, and rather try to unravel the real truth behind
the rich ancient mythology and oral traditions of some cultures. Gold is a
central feature in most, if not all ancient mythology. And yet, as strange
as it may seem, after studying over 600 African mythological stories, I
did not find one clear reference to gold. There may be some hidden
imagery in some of them, but the general absence of gold in these stories
is truly puzzling. It leads me to formulate some new theories. If Africa
was in fact the cradle of the very first humans; and if they were created as
a slaves to work in the gold mines; they would have been a truly
“primitive worker” as the Sumerian scripts call them. As a primitive
species, and in the very early days of human existence, they would have
had no real feeling or understanding for what they were doing. As far as
they saw it, they were given food and shelter while they performed some
gruelling tasks, the reason for which they did not understand. It was a
routine, year in, year out. The ‘stuff’ they were digging up had absolutely
no value to them. They could not eat it, or use it in any way. Only many
thousands of years later, when the human mental capacity increased
dramatically and when interbreeding happened between humans and the
‘godly’ offspring of the Nefilim, did the newly-spawned more intelligent
humans, begin to give the metal value. This would have only occurred
once civilisation and Kingship was bestowed on humans by their ‘gods’
and only after the global system of trade and currency entered the picture.
The strange metal could have possibly developed some kind of strange
sentimental value after the slaves began to set up their own settlements in
Africa, and living away from the mining compounds. But they had no real
understanding of the use for the metal, and the only expression of their
intellect was to adorn themselves with it in many ways, to indicate their
social standing and importance. Because just like their South American
brethren, they always knew that the gold belonged to ‘the gods’.My assumption is that like many scientific theories, ridicule will often
be followed by respect. When we go through the Sumerian texts in later
chapters, you will be amazed at how simply it can all be explained if we
just put our prejudice aside and keep our minds open to new realities.
You see, the first signs of ore mining in Mesoamerica date back to
around 12,000 years ago, before the emergence of agriculture on Earth,
and around the end of the last Ice Age. At this stage humans did not have
it easy. They were constantly under threat from the elements and wild
animals. They were concerned with shelter and food while leading a
predominantly nomadic lifestyle. How and why would gold seem so
attractive to them?
But the oldest signs of ore gold mining get even more interesting when
you visit the so-called Cradle of Humankind, just 20 minutes north of
Johannesburg, South Africa. While archaeologists were making amazing
discoveries about the origins of humanity, they also stumbled onto
previously unexplained phenomena regarding gold mining. They
discovered layers upon layers of prehistoric mining activity, which was
dated back to 7,690 BC by scholars from Yale and Groningen
Universities. This inspired the excavators to search a little further, only to
be rewarded with a find of an ancient mine near the famous landmark of
the Lion Park. They uncovered a five-ton hematite stone which was
covering a large cavern. Carbon dating a piece of charcoal near the mouth
shocked the archaeologists when they found it to be from between 20,000
and 26,000 BC. Not believing what they had found, they searched further
and exposed more mining access sites dating back to 41,000 BC, give or
take 1,600 years. Adrian Boshier and Peter Beaumont then extended their
search to southern Swaziland where they found ancient mines containing
twigs, leaves, grass and feathers which were most likely brought in by the
miners. There were also notched bones, which indicate man's ability to
count at such distant times. Other remains at the site date it back to
around 50,000 BC. This must be a total riddle for historians, evolutionists
and creationists alike. How on Earth is this possible? How will the
supporters of the different doctrines explain this? This is where I would
like to step in and remind the readers of my theory that creation andevolution should be considered simultaneously. The convergence of the
two seems inevitable. While evolution is evident in most life forms
around us, there is mounting evidence of a specific time when man was
created. We will have to come to terms with the reality that the two
philosophies will have to share the stage in the Great Human Puzzle.
We should not be surprised that prehistoric miners were already
mining gold in southern Africa several hundred thousand years ago. After
all, the geological landscape would not have changed at all since then,
and if gold is still available in such abundance in this part of the world
today, it must have been available then. We must remember that until
1970, gold from South Africa made up over 75% of all global gold
supplies. This clearly means that the early humans knew exactly where
the gold was, or they were shown by someone more intelligent where to
dig. So, we need to ask again… why would primitive man, immediately
after being created, start to mine gold so vigorously? It simply does not
make any sense.
Somehow the hunger for gold grew gluttonously over the years. So
much so that ships were dispatched from the Old World by kings and
popes to bring back as much as was humanly possible of this shiny
yellow metal. From the birth of humanity people have killed for gold and
continue to do so to this day. I grew up in one of those mining
communities myself. This hunger for gold probably reached its most
nauseating zenith during the blood-thirsty Spanish invasions of the New
World. The abundance of gold found in the Mesoamericas by the
Conquistadores, together with the mythical stories of golden cities like
Eldorado and Cibola, certainly raise the question: where did the so-called
primitive natives find all that gold? Story has it that during the 200-year
activities of the Conquistadores, the Spaniards looted more gold from the
Americas than has been mined in the entire known world since then. This
could obviously never be substantiated, but makes for some juicy
imagery. But the history books tell us a predictably thin tale of the
history and origins of gold in the world. What is known however, is that
gold has always been and seemingly always will be the centre of great
controversy, speculation and conspiracy.At the centre of the gold gluttony was the ever-present Vatican, which
supported the exploits of the Conquistadores. The split was said to be
90% for the Vatican and 10% for the Spanish king. The king in turn had a
separate agreement with the Conquistadores who undoubtedly had a free-
for-all for themselves when overpowering the native Indian villages of
the New World while looting their gold. It is also said that the Vatican
holds most of the gold in the world. A popular conspiracy holds that the
Vatican has not only attempted to, but largely succeeded in, stealing all
the USA gold reserves, with the aid of a succession of Jesuit US
presidents. As far as conspiracies go, this one seems very interesting
because it has some landmark presidential decisions to support it. The
most famous is the decision by president Nixon on 15 August 1971, to
divorce the Dollar from the gold standard. Suddenly the dollar no longer
had gold to underpin its value and became just a piece of paper with a US
government stamp on it. The Jesuit Order has been a powerful force in
the murky waters of secret societies, linking them back to the formation
of the ‘Illuminati’ around 1,340 AD in the central German state of Hess,
and even further back to the establishment of the Rosicrucian Lodge in
1,100 AD in the German city of Worms, also in the state of Hess. The
Jesuit Order was established in 1540 by a militant Christian-soldier-
turned-cleric, called Ignatius of Loyola, as one of several Counter-
Reformation organisations launched by the Catholics to suppress the rise
of the Protestants. William Bramley has written a riveting book which
deals extensively with most the secret societies in our human history
linking us way back to the Garden of Eden and the so-called ‘Brotherhood
of the Snake’. It makes captivating reading as it unravels many dark
hidden secrets of our ancient past, pointing convincingly to some form of
intervention by more evolved and more intelligent beings. But while they
may have been more advanced, it does not mean they were not violent nor
bloodthirsty. All these ugly characteristics are still clearly evident in
humans today, as visible scars from ancient times. From our behaviour
and the manipulative control which was exercised over us by secret
societies, we can deduce that the influence of these strange phenomena in
many ways prevented humanity from evolving faster to discover the truesecrets behind our origins. But at the same time, there seem to have been
other secret societies that had always had some form of advanced
knowledge and information, which may have had the opposite effect on
human progress. I will resist the temptation of getting too involved in this
topic as Mr. Bramley has covered it superbly in The Gods of Eden.
But gold continued to play a pivotal role in human evolution to the
extent that during the California Gold Rush starting around the 1850s,
Vatican monks would basically use their cloth as a front to steal the gold
from the native Indians along the Mexican and Californian coasts. There
are reports of hard labour, slavery and torture of the natives, by Catholic
monks in the name of god, and in pursuit of gold for the Vatican. Gold
was probably the first metal known to Humankind and references to it
have appeared almost from the birth of writing. Our entire human history
is inextricably linked to the production of gold. If we take at face value
what the Sumerians have written in their tablets, we learn that we were
created as a slave species by the Anunnaki, with the sole purpose to work
in the gold mines. The answer to the question, ‘why is mankind so
obsessed with gold from the very beginning?’ is quite simple. Gold was
the first thing known to primitive man. He was surrounded by it and
consumed by it. It was the principal reason why he was created. The truth
is however, that it was not really man who was so consumed by gold, but
his masters and gods, the Anunnaki.
When we explore this early obsession with gold, we begin to
understand the overpowering effect it must have had on early humans,
how it shaped their behaviour in times to come, and how it drove their
own vanity, greed and desire to be like their gods. Very quickly, this
forbidden gold must have become the most desirable possession among
the human slaves. They found ways to acquire it illegally, but gold was
most likely also used to reward them from time to time for acts of
obedience. So as time passed, a growing amount of gold made its way
into human hands. Not really knowing what to do with it, or what its true
purpose was, they started using their newly-acquired forbidden fruit in
unconventional ways. They turned it into bracelets, necklaces, rings,
ornaments, trinkets and an ever growing list of items of which the solepurpose was to show off its owner's elevated status in the emerging
community. They made imitations of their gods' possessions, their
chariots, their dwellings, their symbols and even their image.
Archaeologists have uncovered countless numbers of effigies of many
ancient gods. The value of gold suddenly exploded when the Anunnaki
allowed the humans to leave the compounds of the mines and live on
their own in growing communities.
This period seems to coincide precisely with the sudden emergence of
civilisation in the Near East around 7,000 BC. Many humans settled here
while continuing to work for their gods. The mines in the southern part of
Africa continued to produce gold, but the human workers had now
developed many communities that have spread over large parts of the
continent. Golden artefacts attained the highest status symbol on Earth,
and humans started to decorate themselves more and more with symbolic
new jewellery. The more gold you possessed, the higher your status in the
community. But it also meant that you had something to trade with or
bargain with. This was exactly what the genetically modified human
genome was waiting for. A stimulus to activate several dormant genes,
which would cause continuous havoc for thousands of years to come. The
greed gene, the gluttony gene, the opulence gene and a few more beauties
hidden in our DNA, of which we are equally unaware at this stage. And so
began the eternal race for possession and control among primitive
humans, which is stronger today than ever before. I have always been
fascinated by primitive tribes around the world and the importance they
place on decorative artefacts and shiny objects. I could never understand
that there were so many similarities in their rituals and their gods while
they are separated by thousands of miles, oceans and continents. But the
common human ancestry with its magic, shiny ingredient seems to tie it
all together. The many rituals performed by the forgotten tribes of the
world still today, and the importance they place on ornamental and
decorative objects, can all be linked to the birth of man some 200,000
years ago and the role which gold played in his evolution.
This obsession with gold was quickly adopted by Mesolithic (Middle
Stone Age 10,000 to 4,000 BC) and Neolithic (Near or Late Stone Age4,000 BC) humans in the Near East after the Great Flood some 13,000
years ago, while being helped by their gods to attain new knowledge of
agriculture, architecture, communal living and more. We have evidence
of this rapidly emerging and refined artistic culture from Sumerian
artefacts. This know-how was successfully copied and developed to
staggering proportions by the Egyptian royalty. Everyone in the world
today is acutely aware of the great Egyptian achievements and the great
wealth they accumulated. The amount of gold found in many of the
Pharaohs’ burial chambers astounded archaeologists when it was first
discovered. This was something that the tomb raiders of the past 200
years knew very well, as they plundered these riches from the early days
of post-diluvial humanity.
But by this time, some gods had decided to help man out of bondage
and empower him with knowledge for survival. This caused
unprecedented tension among the Anunnaki gods which led to argument,
conflict and bloody battles for control of a rapidly dividing world.
Various gods took refuge in distant corners of the world like the
Americas, China, Australia, India or wherever they could set up a secure
base for themselves. Every step of the way, the dispersed Anunnaki had
their human slaves to perform the hard labour in the process of building
new civilisations around them. The gods controlled the humans with an
iron fist, giving them strict instructions on most things, rewarding them
when they felt it appropriate and punishing them severely if the human
slaves disobeyed. This is pretty much the story of most popular religions
from the beginning of time, especially the Old Testament. We examine
the so-called ‘wrath of god’ in other chapters, which show us the distinct
humanlike needs displayed by the ancient gods. This globalisation by the
gods explains why the same strict dictator-like behaviour was witnessed
all around the world by virtually all the communities of early humans.
While the Egyptian artistry and creation of spectacular golden artefacts
were unprecedented on Earth, the cradle of goldsmiths was in fact the
Sumerian civilisation starting as far back as 5,000 BC, according to the
latest digs in Iraq and Syria. Nestled between the Tigris and Euphrates
rivers, they set most of the trends for global generations to follow. Theytraded their wheat and barley, upstream and downstream for other goods,
including gold. The Greeks later called this Mesopotamia, the ‘Land
Between the Rivers’. Here the Sumerians appeared and flourished until
around 2000 BC in cities like Uruk, Larsa, Umma and Ur. These cities
had a network of well-planned streets and well-organised societies. They
pioneered cuneiform writing on clay tablets the size of a postcard, and
wrote poetry. Their craftsmanship with wood, stone, ivory, semi-precious
stones and especially gold, was astonishing. Many of these are to be
admired at the British Museum in London, the University Museum in
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and nearer to its origins, at the Baghdad
Museum in Iraq, which was unfortunately decimated by looters during
the George W. Bush attacks. Gold cups, helmets, bracelets, garlands and
chains of delicate workmanship, reveal an exceptional understanding of
how to exploit gold's unique properties of malleability, ductility and
resilience. Jewellery historian Guido Gregorietti observed of the
Sumerian times that, “In fact, there were more different types of
jewellery than there are today.”
But did the Sumerians really write the opening chapter in the history of
gold, or was it happening simultaneously in other parts of the world?
They may have been the pioneers in golden jewellery production, but
gold was being mined all over the world under the supervision of
rebellious gods with the knowledge of mining and the desire to claim a
piece of this planet for themselves.
You see, Sumer itself did not have gold, so it had to import it from
somewhere. This was probably a great opportunity for the new custodian
gods scattered around the world to bring their golden spoils to Sumer,
establishing trade links while keeping their human slaves back home
working, fearful and obedient. Jewellery expert Graham Hughes says,
“Sumerian work is flavoured with amazing sophistication, delicacy of
touch, fluency of line, a general elegance of conception, all suggest that
the goldsmiths’ craft emerged almost fully fledged in early
Mesopotamia.” How is that possible? That primitive humans emerged out
of the Stone Age, set up well-structured communities, and immediately
showed great knowledge of manufacturing some of the most refinedgolden jewellery we know today? Sumerian treasures reveal how well the
goldsmiths understood working with gold. They used different alloys, and
cast gold in solid or hollow ornaments. They chased veins on leaves or
grooves on beads using the lost-wax technique. Jugs or cups could be
beaten into shape from a flat sheet of gold, using sophisticated heat
treatment. They even beat gold into thin foil or ribbon. This kind of
sudden knowledge and sophistication clearly points to some form of
intelligent intervention, which could only have come from their Anunnaki
masters and gods.
So now we know that the origin of humanity is somehow directly
linked to the production of gold on Earth. That the human slaves were
aided towards civilisation by their gods and makers, who accidentally
created the gold trade on Earth by dispersing and forcing their own group
of human slaves to mine the precious metal. While there was gold mining
activity and jewellery-making going on in many centres of the world,
Sumer was the main concentration of Anunnaki gods on Earth, and
therefore it became the fastest growing centre of civilisation, setting the
standard for an accidental industry which consumes most of the gold in
the world today. This is the incredible story of the jewellery industry,
which was an accidental by-product of a slave species and a group of
occupying astronaut gods. The East consumes over 75% of the annual
global production of gold in the 21st century AD. In 2002 this amounted
to 2,726.7 metric tons.
We must take a step back to avoid being blinded by all this incredible
stuff. After all, we have come a long way in 11,000 years. We have
evolved mentally and physically. If we have much of the Anunnaki DNA
in our cells, we need to ask ourselves, how advanced were they really?
My theory is, that they were not as advanced as I may have originally
thought. I say this because the behaviour they displayed from the very
first day on this planet, bears the symptoms of a species that falls way
short of a complete genome. We have inherited many of their
characteristics. I just pray that we lose the primitive desire to cover
ourselves with shiny metal as we evolve towards more intelligent beings.After all, it was all a big accident.
But to protect themselves against possible competition from a new
species on Earth, the Anunnaki gods ensured that the genome of the slave
species was severely stunted. They ensured that the new human species
did not live too long, was prone to disease, did not use much of its brain
and had a finite memory. But the one thing they did not count on was the
evolution of our genome and our intelligence. Maybe they did not
consider the evolutionary aspects, because they truly did not expect to
stay on this planet for so long.