Slave Species of god
by
Michael Tellinger
A Zulu Planet Publishers Book
Johannesburg – South Africa.
2009Slave Species of god
Published by Zulu Planet Publishers
PO Box 204 Waterval Boven 1195 South Africa
Email: publisher@zuluplanet.com
www.zuluplanet.com
© Michael Tellinger 2005
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be copied or reproduced in
any way without the written permission from the publisher and author.
The author has asserted his moral rights.
Michael Tellinger can be contacted on:
michael@slavespecies.com
Visit the website and subscribe to my newsletters:
www.slavespecies.com
First published by Music Masters Close Corporation Johannesburg South
Africa.
1st edition 2005; Second edition 2006; Third edition 2006;
Fourth edition 2009
This is the electronic edition.I would like to thank a few people for their assistance and support in
helping me to complete this book:
Mike van Niekerk for his ongoing moral and financial support.
Andy Stadler for his advice, motivation and African sunsets.
Ryan Aldridge for the inspiring cover design.
Leigh Stadler, Pamela MacQuilkan, Jan Swanepoel for reading the raw
material and giving me their valuable comments.
Tiara Walters for her critical input as the devil’s advocate.
Lily Hattingh for her relentless commitment and working into the early
hours of the morning on the layout.
Thanks to Kerry Marshall and Terry Cropper for spotting all the gremlins
in the first edition.
Scott Cundill for his ingenious online marketing campaign and his
contribution towards making this book a bestseller in South Africa.Note to readers!
Each chapter was written with the objective to function as a small piece
of the greater puzzle – one of 17 building blocks which collectively tell a
more compelling tale. I have attempted to take the reader by the hand and
guide them towards the deep end of the knowledge pool.
While some chapters will appeal more to some readers, and less to others,
I have tried to keep them as short and punchy as possible, while getting
the core message across. There is however a strange logic to the sequence
of the journey I have chosen to take you on and it all comes together in
chapter 16.
“The Story of Humankind” combines all the information you will absorb
in the previous chapters and expose you to the time before the creation of
the human race and the strange activity on Earth in such distant times
which includes the terrible truth surrounding our origins.
So do not lose sight of the fact that there is a chronology woven into the
puzzle. If however you find yourself at odds with some of the more
technical chapters and you cannot see your way through them… read
Chapter 16 if you read nothing else.
Enjoy the read and keep exploring.
Michael Tellinger.Contents
Introduction
Chapter 1 Animal Behaviour
Chapter 2 The Cell
Chapter 3 The Brain
Chapter 4 A Journey Back in Time
Chapter 5 The Genome
Chapter 6 Panspermia
Chapter 7 Planet X
Chapter 8 Human Nature
Chapter 9 Gold - The Endless Obsession
Chapter 10 Instant Civilisation and Sumer
Chapter 11 The Wrath of god
Chapter 12 Slaves and Spies
Chapter 13 World Religion - The Great Slave Maker
Chapter 14 Myths and Lies - The Living gods
Chapter 15 The Mystery of Jesus and Other Prophets
Chapter 16 The Story of Humankind
Chapter 17 Food for Thought in Bite-Size Chunks
BibliographyIntroduction
In an age where technology has allowed us to expect instant reward
and provides us with immediate solutions, Humankind seems to have all
the answers. Our confidence as a species is higher than ever before and
the knowledge of the universe we live in is expanding faster than most
people can keep up with. We can compute and calculate the landing of a
small probe on a planet 100 million miles away; we know what the
atmosphere on Jupiter consists of; we can regenerate new organs in our
bodies and genetic engineers can create new life in any shape or size they
want to. There are however three fundamental questions that we have not
been able to answer. Who are we? How did we get here? And, why are we
here?
As we steadfastly march on the road to an unknown destiny, our
ignorance has become our weakness and our arrogance has become a
congenital disease threatening us with our own annihilation. In this book
we will deal with the latest breakthroughs in science and technology, to
reach back into the distant past in an attempt to unravel the extremely
vague origins of Humankind. It simply makes no sense at all that, as
advanced as we have become, we have no absolute answers dealing with
our origins and ancestry. Why has Humankind been so obsessed with
gold? And why are slavery and gold the two common denominators that
can be traced all the way back to the very dawn of Humankind?
The global population is torn between hundreds of religions and cults,
all claiming to have the answers. Any semi-sober person will realise in an
instant that they cannot all be right. Right? And yet it is religious dogma
that has held billions of people captive through preaching death and
destruction, threatening punishment by the ‘all mighty’ to disobedient
pilgrims and promising reward and salvation to those who submit to blind
faith.
The past 50 years have seen an explosion of new archaeologicaldiscoveries which have stunned scholars all over the world with its body
of information. Over 500,000 clay tablets have been excavated and many
of them have been deciphered. It is only in the past 30 years or so, that
the true meaning and relevance of the tablets has been identified by a
handful of broad thinkers. What was originally believed to be myth or
fantasy, mainly due to ignorance by so-called scholars, has turned out to
be documented historic evidence so fantastic, that it shakes the very
essence of our existence.
I would like to take you on a journey of discovery, using the latest
translations and revelations of the many tablets that speak about ancient
events long before a single word of the Bible was written. It is shocking
to find that none of the stories of the book of Genesis are original but
rather are watered down versions of much older stories conveyed in great
detail in ancient clay tablets. Our journey will weave through precious
detailed information which was left behind by our ancient ancestors,
probably never realising that it would be treated with such suspicion.
The uncanny coincidences which link the many ancient civilisations by
the same pantheon of ‘mythical gods’ are too fantastic to be accidental.
We now have irrefutable evidence that there were strange powers on
Earth who ruled the early humans with an iron fist. They dispensed
punishment and demanded absolute obedience from the primitive new
species. We will uncover the slow and painful path the newly created
human race had to travel and the crucial role played by more advanced
deities who had ulterior motives for our existence. We will uncover the
terrible truth that the human race was indeed created in the image of our
maker, but the maker was not who we’ve been led to believe. We will
unmask the god of the Bible and other major religions, showing the
difference between God with a big ‘G’ as opposed to god with a small ‘g’.
The god who constantly displays humanlike behaviour, the god of
vengeance we know from the Bible, turns out to be a god with a small ‘g’.
Some characters will be instantly recognizable, while others have been so
distorted by latter translators that we will need a little polishing to
identify them. Many more questions will be raised as we postulate new
theories surrounding our origins, demystifying God and allowing thereader to experience the much bigger picture of possibility.
With the help of science and the corroborative evidence from
thousands of ancient clay tablets, we are now able to weave together the
full story which I like to refer to as the ‘Great Human Puzzle’. The
thousands of years it took for the ‘slave species’ to progress from their
labour camps in southern Africa, to the point about 9,000 years ago, when
a wave of sudden civilization spread around the world. From India, the
Near East, Europe and the Americas. This journey will also resolve the
many archaeological dilemmas regarding the missing link, which is
clearly outlined by our advanced ancestors. We dispel the myth and the
dogma that has kept Humankind ignorant and fearful for far too long. The
advances we have made in genetic engineering will help us understand
that just because we can create life, it does not make us God.
We dispel archaic myths that belong in the dark ages and provide clear
thinking individuals with the information to reach new conclusions. I
would like to share with every reader the same incredible sense of
discovery that I personally experienced as I unravelled the utter rubbish
which I was conditioned to believe through my formative years. As
terrible as this ‘new truth’ may sound, it will be the most liberating
experience you will have.