
I — THE LABYRINTH OF
HISTORY
Plate I. Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah (from The
Signs of Heaven by M. Hischoff).
1 — Cataracts of Fire
Pallas rushed from the peaks of Heaven like the bright star sent
by the son of crafty-counselled Chronos (as a sign either to
sailors or the broad array of nations) from which many sparks
proceed.
Homer, The Iliad 3
Scarce had the old man ceased from praying when a peal of
thunder was heard on the left and a star gliding from the
heavens amid the darkness, rushed through space followed by a
train of light; we saw the star suspended for a moment above the
roof, brighten our home with its fires, then tracing out a brilliant
course, disappear in the forests of Ida; then a long trail of flame
illuminated us, and the place around reeked with the smell of
sulphur. Overcome by these startling portents, my father arose,
invoked the gods and worshipped the holy star.
Virgil, The Aeneid 4
If the earth and sky had no starting point in time, why have no poets
sung of feats before the Theban war and the tragedy of Troy? Why
have so many heroic deeds recurrently dropped out of mind and
found no shrine in lasting monuments of fame? The answer, I
believe, is that this world is newly made: its origin is a recent event,
not one of remote antiquity. That why even now some arts are still
being perfected: the process of development is still going on ...
Alternatively you may believe that all these things existed before, but
that the human race was wiped out by a burst of fiery heat or its
cities were laid low by some great upheaval of the world ... All the
more reason, then, to concede my point and admit that an end is
coming to earth and sky. If the world was indeed shaken by such
plagues and perils, then it needs only more violent shock to make it
collapse in universal ruin ... There is no lack of external bodies to
rally out of infin ite space and blast (the world) with a turbulent
tornado or inflict some other mortal disaster ... It follows, then, that
the doorway of death is not barred to the sky ... Legend tells of one
occasion when fire got the upper hand ... The victory of fire, when
earth felt its withering blast, occurred when the galloping steeds that
draw the chariot of the Sun swept Phaethon from the true course,
right out of the zone of ether and far over all the lands. Then the
Father Almighty, in a fierce gust of anger, struck down the aspiring
Phaethon with a sudden stroke of his thunderbolt, down out of the
chariot to the earth. But the Sun intercepted the everlasting torch of
the firmament in its fall, brought the trembling steeds back to the
yoke from their stampede and, guiding them along their proper
course, restored the universe to order: Such is the story as recited by
the ancient bards of Greece, a story utterly rejected by true doctrine.
What may really lead to the triumph of fire is an increase in the
accumulation of its particles out of infinite space. Then comes the
crisis: either its forces for some reason or other suffer a setback, or
the world shrivels in its parching blasts and comes to an end.
Lucretius, De Rerum Natura 5
God, whose dwelling is in the sky, shall roll up the heavens as a book
is rolled, and the whole firmament in its varied forms shall fall on the
divine earth and on the sea; and then shall flow a ceaseless cataract
of raging fire and shall burn land and sea, and the firmament of
heaven and the stars and creation itself it shall cast in one molten
mass and clean dissolve. Then no more shall there be luminaries,
twinkling orbs, no night, no dawn. ... no spring, no summer, no
winter, no autumn.
Sybilline Oracles 6
In the west a star shall shine, which they call a comet, a messenger to
men of the sword, famine and death.
Sybilline Oracles 6
Our eyesight is not able to pass through the middle of a celestial body
to see through it to the things on the other side. But through a comet
the things beyond are seen ... Accordingly it is obvious that a comet is
not a celestial body ... Zeno judges that stars come together ... and
from this union of light there comes into existence the image of a
rather long star. Therefore some suppose that comets do not exist
but that only the appearance of comets is rendered through ... the
conjunction of stars clinging together ... Some say that comets have
their own orbits and after fixed periods of time they come into
men’s view. Others say that do not last long and are dissipated in a
brief period of time ... We see various kinds of fire conceived on high,
sometimes the heavens blazing, sometimes Tong trails of flame
glowing white behind’, sometimes great fiery bodies hurtling by ... All
men are amazed at those phenomena which carry sudden fire down
from on high, whether something flashes and disappears or the
atmosphere is compressed and forced into glowing, and it is taken as
a miracle ... Sometimes (the stars) do not wait for night but burst out
and shine well within daytime ... Why do they appear at a time not
their own? It is generally agreed that stars exist even when hidden.
Seneca, Naturales Quaestiones 7
Dynasty Han, Reign Yuan-yan, Year 1, Month 4, Day Ding-you. At
the hour of rifu, the sky was cloudless. There was a rumbling like
thunder. A meteor with a head as big as a fou, and a length of some
ten-odd zhang, colour bright red and white, went south-eastward
from below the Sun. in all directions meteors, some as large as
basins, others as large as hens’eggs, brilliantly rained down. This
only ceased at evening twilight.
Ancient Chinese Observations of Meteor Showers 8
Fierce, foreboding omens came over the land of Northumbria and
wretchedly terrified the people. There were excessive whirlwinds,
lightning storms and fiery dragons were seen flying in the sky. These
signs were followed by great famine. . .
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, June 793 9
The middle of the fourteenth century was a period of extraordinary
terror and disaster to Europe. Numerous portents, which sadly
frightened the people, were followed by a pestilence which
threatened to turn the continent into an unpeopled wilderness. For
year after year there were signs in the sky, on the earth, in the air, all
indicative, as men thought, of some terrible coming event. In 1337 a
great comet appeared in the heavens, its far-extending tail sowing
deep dread in the minds of the ignorant masses. During the three
succeeding years the land was visited by enormous flying armies of
locusts, which descended in myriads upon the fields, and left the
shadow of famine in their track ... What with famine, flood, fog,
locust swarms, earthquakes, and the like, it is not surprising that
many men deemed the cup of the world’s sins to be full, and the end
of the kingdom of man to be at hand ... An event followed that
seemed to confirm this belief. A pestilence broke out of such frightful
virulence that it appeared indeed as if man was to be swept from the
earth. Men died in hundreds, in thousands, in myriads, until in
places there were scarcely enough living to bury the dead, and these
so maddened with fright that dwellings, villages, towns, were
deserted by all who were able to flee, the dying and dead being left
their sole inhabitants. It was the pestilence called the ‘Black Death’,
the most terrible visitation that Europe has ever known ... London
lost one hundred thousand of its population; in all England a
number estimated at from one third to one half of the entire
population (then probably numbering from three to five millions)
were swept into the grave. If we take Europe as a whole it is believed
that fully a fourth of its inhabitants were carried away by this terrible
scourge. For two years, the pestilence raged, 1348 and 1349. It broke
out again in 1361-62, and once more in 1369. The mortality caused
by the plague was only one of its disturbing consequences. The bonds
of society were loosened; natural affection seemed to vanish; friend
deserted friend, mothers even fled from their children ... [others]
seeing no hope of relief from human action, turned to God as their
only refuge, and deemed it necessary to propitiate the Deity by
extraordinary sacrifices and self-tortures. The flame of fanaticism,
once started, spread rapidly and widely. Hundreds of men, and even
boys, marched in companies through the roads and streets, carrying
heavy torches, scourging their naked shoulders with knotted whips,
which were often loaded with lead or iron, singing penitential hymns,
parading in bands which bore banners and were distinguished by
white hats with red crosses. Women as well as men took part in these
fanatical exercises, marching about half-naked, whipping each other
frightfully, flinging themselves on the earth in the public places of
the towns ...
The Romance of Reality 10
Of course, the fashions and prejudices of the day will always color
our perception of the past. And from our supposedly enlightened
perspective or the twentieth century, it may seem perfectly natural to
regard Armageddon by divine dispensation as so much moonshine.
We can hardly escape the fact, however, whatever its basis, that the
dreaded expectation of fire from heaven is a pregnant component of
our intellectual heritage (Plates 1, 2).
Indeed, the fear is apparently as ancient as civilization itself. A
modern historian 11 for example, writing of the period five thousand
years ago when man’s great intellectual adventure seems to have
begun, comments that Mesopotamian civilization grew up in an
environment which was signally different from our own. As in Egypt,
there were the same great cosmic rhythms, the change of seasons,
the unwavering sweep of the Sun, Moon and stars. But also ‘an
unusual element in the sky of force and violence’. As if to imply that
this element may not also have been present in Egypt — which is, as
we shall see, questionable this historian went on to construct a
somewhat contrived antithesis between the erratic behavior of the
Tigris and the Euphrates, on the one hand, and the supposedly more
predictable behavior of the Nile on the other. But he also noted the
scorching winds smother men in dust, and threaten to suffocate him;
in addition, the torrential rains which turn firm ground into a sea of
mud and rob man of his freedom of movement. The abiding
impression, the historian seeks to assure us, is of man standing
amidst these great powers, sensing his weakness and realizing with
dread that he is caught in the interplay of giant forces in Nature.
His mood is therefore tense, and his lack of strength creates for him
an awareness of tragic potentialities.
To explain, for instance, that certain atmospheric changes broke a
drought and brought rain, we are informed that the Sumerians and
Babylonians observed much the same facts as us but experienced
them in terms of interventions by the gigantic bird Imdugud which
came to their rescue:
‘It covered the sky with the black storm clouds of its wings and
devoured the Bull of Heaven, whose hot breath had scorched the
crops’. In telling such a myth, the ancients did not intend to
provide entertainment. Neither did they seek, in a detached way
and without ulterior motives, for intelligible explanations of the
natural phenomena. They were recounting events in which they
were involved to the extent of their very existence. They
experienced, directly, a conflict of powers, one hostile to the
harvest upon which they depended, the other frightening but
beneficial: the thunderstorm reprieved them in the nick of time
by defeating and utterly destroying the drought. 12
Only by supposing the ancients dramatized the mundane, then, can
the historian apparently come to terms with the intensity of the
experiences of Nature which gave rise to the ancient Mesopotamian
mood and thus account for their disturbing notion of the cosmos: a
cosmos of predictable order rather than anarchy, it seems, but one,
nonetheless, that was far from safe or reassuring. What emerges,
then, from detailed studies of the written records and inscriptions
left by Sumerians and Babylonians is an attitude to nature which
obliged them to contemplate the universe with a sense of foreboding
hardly short of paralysis. It is this apparently strange attitude,
sustained for millennia, that seems to have led to the full
complement of diviners, soothsayers, exorcists and astrologers which
was in due course to be found in the great temples of Babylonia.
Figure 1. Beginnings of civilization. Map including the major
areas, apart from the Chinese plains, in which we have evidence
of the origin of agriculture and the building of cities in remote
antiquity (adapted from at original illustration due to J. D.
Bernal: Science in History).
We know from early Babylonian references that their most ancient
manual of astrology, an encyclopedia of omen text entitled ‘Enuma
Anu Enlil’ (‘Concerning the beginning of Anu and Enlil’), covers a
period that stretched back well into the third millennium BC. The
omen texts were essentially lists of correlated phenomena, dire
terrestrial consequences of repeated astronomical events attributable
to gods. Thus, in late Sumerian as in Old Babylonian writings, flood
and deluge were sent by the gods, along with equally catastrophic
visitations of plague, drought and famine, and there can be little
doubt that the omens were used for the puiposes of understanding
natural phenomena and predicting the likely future course of events.
To the extent, moreover, that there was a clear astronomical
association with such phenomena as the Flood, there are hints that
the astronomical visitations may have been regular as well as
harmful for in the Sumerian version of the Flood, Ziusudra,
counterpart of the Old Babylonia Ut-Napishtim and the Biblical
Noah, is represented as having an ability to forewarn! and of
resorting to divinatory practices; while Emmeduranki of Sippur, one
of the kings of this age, anticipating events, is alleged to have
obtained from the gods the skills and insignia of divination. We can
be fairly sure, in fact, that the earliest form of astronomy to be
practiced was based on an interpretation of omens associated with
regular, repeatable phenomena; and there is no question that these
omens were derived from strange celestial portents, unusual
atmospheric conditions or violent storms, each manifesting either
the good will or malevolence of the gods concerning some known or
unknown event in the future. It is possible of course, and even likely,
that ordinary agricultural, calendrical and navigational requirements
of astronomy were recognized as well. However we are left in no
doubt at all that it was these mysterious signs from heaven and
man’s fear of their possible consequences that were largely
responsible for fostering man’s careful observation of the sky.
Five thousand years later and by an extremely tortuous path, this
practice of sky watching has gradually evolved and as a result, man
has now been led to his current ‘scientific’ understanding of the
universe. This being the case, however, our modern view of the
universe, indeed science generally, appears to be grounded in
activities that seem to owe more to desperation than contemplation,
more to fear than reason; a state of affairs with which scholars are
not very comfortable. After all, if men of culture and privilege in
another generation could build cosmology out of irrationality, out of
a fear apparently rooted in imagination, how far can one trust the
pronouncements of their modernday counterparts might not be
trusted — that a modern savant 13 hastens to assure us that an
archaeologist many years hence, who chances to unearth some
twentieth-century newspaper, would naturally be led to conclude
that we too regulated our lives in accordance with the predictions of
astrologers. He is arguing, obviously, that cultured sections of the
population among early civilizations would not have been affected by
astrology and that astrological fatalism was always the device of
charlatans, not proper astronomers, for the edification of morons
who could afford to pay liberally for indulging such a cult. It is an
attractive idea: it gets science off the hook, and it leaves the ancient
astrologer to his strange devices! The idea, however, is without
foundation: indeed it is wholly wrong. The fact is that rulers and
ruled alike in ancient Mesopotamia had absolute faith in astrologers
and that it was the advice of astrologers above all which was sought
when it came to affairs of state.
On a straightforward interpretation then, putting aside our
twentiethcentury fashions and prejudices, it would seem that the sky
as understood by the Babylonians harboured dangers which
determined the destiny of nations. Indeed the level of conditioning to
this idea was so complete that the assumption itself would never
have been questioned. This is of course a striking fact; and why
intelligent men, let alone the remainder of the population, should in
the past have formulated a view of the universe so threatening and so
unlike that which presents itself to the casual observer today has
never been satisfactorily resolved in modern times — unless, of
course, we are happy with the assumption that common sense and
human courage are recent acquisitions.
There are two possible ways of explaining this hiatus in
understanding. Either the ancient sky behaved in some manner
which was truly different from the present day, or modern man is
indeed significantly more matter-of-fact and enlightened than his
ancient counterpart. The second alternative happens to be the one
that is chosen! Our modern savant, for example, goes on to say of the
historical development of his subject that it’ shows how the
conception of a continuous interference and control of the universe
by some external power gave way to a nobler and higher conception
of an inherent natural order. A mechanical view of the universe
replaced the older and cruder view, which was quite consistent with
arbitrary and vindictive acts on the part of a pretty-minded ruler.
The modern astronomer pursues his research in the assumption that
such acts do not occur and without this assumption, he could not
with any degree of confidence continue his investigations.’
To its credit, the statement is as clear an expression of fundamental
principle as one could hope to find and it certainly describes
accurately enough the lofty turn of mind that is so often cultivated
amongst the learned today. But how can we be sure that it is not
based on an insecure modern preconception? How can we be sure, in
other words, that the sky never changes, that it never produces a
cataract of raging fire?
At first sight this question still seems bizarre. After all, there were
professional sky-watchers in the past and they have left us their
records. Surely it is inconceivable that the disinterested scholars who
analyze these records could have missed anything so dramatic as a
cataract of raging fire? Indeed it could be argued that the very fact
that we are conditioned to believe the sky was not dangerous is
evidence enough that it was not: after all, the experts who have
examined the evidence thoroughly must have arrived at this
conclusion in a balanced way. On the face of it, therefore, this is not
an issue that can suddenly become a topic for renewed speculation:
one is surely dealing with reasonably established historical facts.
But of course, history is not all a collection of hard facts. 14 Like
science, history is a matter of inference; and records may in principle
mislead unless an accurate picture of what they describe is also at
hand. The question that is posed therefore is whether the records left
by the ancient sky-watchers are so transparent as to their meaning
that no misunderstanding can possibly exist. Is it absolutely certain,
then, what the Babylonian astrologers had in mind?
Until fairly recently, this has not seemed a particularly interesting
question to ask. It has generally been assumed that the first thoughts
of any real value about the universe are those handed down to us by
the Greeks. However this assumption has been seriously questioned
by Otto Neugebauer, 15 the distinguished historian of mathematics
and astronomy, and it is his conclusion that Babylonian skywatching should not be regarded as irrational, even though its nature
and purpose did eventually undergo a profound change. This finding
has not as yet very much influence on the generality of scientific
historical studies. Nevertheless, it is Neugebauer’s thesis that a quite
significant scientific revolution was engineered by the Greeks around
the fourth century BC and that little progress can be made in
understanding ancient science and history until the precise nature of
this intellectual upheaval has been fully explored. On the face of it, a
scientific methodology developed and perfected over a thousand
years earlier in Hammurab’s Babylon was put aside by astronomers
of this later period in favour of new analytical techniques along with
new understandings of nature. In essence, the practice and theory of
‘omen astrology’, or judicial astrology as it is sometimes called, gave
way at the very foundation of western civilization to the new-found
theory and practice of ‘horoscopic astrology’.
We shall be examining various aspects of this development at greater
length in a later chapter but for the moment we note two points. On
the one hand, the Greeks are now clearly seen as having taken over
certain recent advances in the mathematical methods of the
Babylonians and fashioning them in new and unexpected directions.
On the other hand, arising from this step, the Greeks can now be
seen also as having abandoned at this time the prevailing view of the
cosmos and cultivating an entirely new understanding of how it
works.
On the mathematical side, it was the Babylonians, as we now know,
who developed the precise algebraic techniques that enabled the
combined effects of various superposed periodicities in the motion of
heavenly bodies to be calculated. These techniques were essential in
determining the apparent position of the Moon and in setting up an
accurate calendar based on its motion. 16 However, it is perfectly
clear that the Babylonians also knew, as we do now, that such
calculations could be done without reference to any physical model
of the Moon’s behavior. They understood that they were merely
projecting into the future, with greater precision than would have
been possible without mathematics, such Pends and correlations as
had been detected amongst past measurements. But it was the
Greeks who took over the principles of this algebra and applied them
to geometrical models: they suggested that the positions of the
planets in the sky could be explained as the combined effects of
various superposed circular motions, and by these means they came
to invent the theory of epicycles.
No harm would have come of this otherwise laudable computing
Device had it not then happened that Greek philosophers took to
thinking the epicycles were physically real. There emerged the idea
that planets, with the Sun and the Moon, were somehow attached to
invisible crystalline spheres interlocked by a complicated and equally
invisible system of revolving gears. Soon, by the force of their own
logic, the Greeks were convincing themselves that nothing out of the
sky would penetrate these crystalline spheres to harm the Earth
below. 17
.
Astronomers and scientists generally have, of course, long realized
that the epicyclic system was an illusion but in directing these
particular Greek thought to the intellectual dustbin, it has been all
too easy to hang them on the Babylonia forebears of the Greeks as
well. In fact, there is no good reason for supposing the Babylonians
were similarly captivated or that it affected their view of the cosmos.
Indeed, as Neugebauer explains, all the evidence indicates that the
Babylonians, unlike the Greeks, were quite straightforward in their
dealings with astronomy the universe may have been frightening but
they sought to describe it much as they saw it, in simple
commonsense terms. To them, there would have been nothing odd
about things out of the sky harming the Earth. If, then, the
Babylonians appear to confront real things in the sky, as the
historians would have us believe, and if, also, we have good reason to
believe that the astrologers were straightforward and scientific, why
can we not settle the issue by examining the astrologer’s actual
records and discovering the precise nature of the sky they described?
The ancient city of Babylon first came to prominence early in the
second millennium BC, as Semitic immigrants gradually merged
with and supplanted the indigenous Sumerian
population. 18 Sumerian culture was not lost however and it was the
founding of new schools of language and theology which apparently
created the atmosphere of general learning that emerged in Babylon
and which then provided the milieu in which the discipline of
mathematics was able to originate. There also emerged a powerful
new ecclesiastical school beholden to the god Marduk. This deity,
whilst not altogether displacing Anu, the highest of the ancient
Sumerian gods, now achieved great power and completely replaced
earlier animal divinities such as Enlil (probably a bull) and Ea
(probably a ram) who were also of high rank in the Sumerian
pantheon. Apart from their ecclesiastical deities however, the priests
of Marduk were also astronomers and it is they who seem to have
initiated the practice and theory of omen astrology. Under their
guidance, celestial phenomena came to be used for predicting the
imminent future of the country and its government, particularly the
king. From the appearance or non-appearance of ‘planetary bodies’,
conclusions were drawn concerning the invasion of enemies from the
east or the west, and in addition the arrival of floods and storms, but
nothing like a horoscope based on a constellation at the moment of
birth has ever been found. In other words, Babylonian astrology right
from the start is seen as being much better compared with weather
prediction from phenomena observed in the skies than it is with the
casting of horoscopes. Indeed it is now hardly to be doubted that this
omen astrology was soundly based on the concept of observed
irregularities in nature which were indicative of other disturbances
to come, and in this respect it differs not at all from the practice of
modern science.
But whilst the principles underlying the methodology seem
reasonable, the same is not generally said of the actual observations.
Thus the specific and fundamental irregularities that the astronomer
priests of Marduc were in the habit of recording were the emergence
of new-born lambs and the appearance of the liver or other internal
parts of lifeless sheep! Thousands upon thousands of clay tablets
have been unearthed on which were kept the updated accounts
relating to the delivery of these animals or their fleeces. Such
observations immediately conjure up a rather mundane or
distasteful image: the astrologers seem to be more at home in the
market place, or to indulge in strange sacrificial practices that have
little to do with the honest pursuit of knowledge. However, we
should not forget that astronomerspriests were also the spokesmen
on earth for generations of leaders who clamed their divine right to
rule from sky gods who, as shepherd-kings, were said to have
descended with their flocks from Heaven at the time of the Flood. It
may not be coincidental therefore that the recurrence of a
catastrophic event like the Flood should have been anticipated on the
basis of deviant behavior by sheep, something which must
presumably have preceded the Flood itself. For if each sheep was in
fact some kind of celestial object which was in the habit of going into
predictable decline before fragmenting into a number of bright
offspring under circumstances that were not without danger to our
planet, the astronomer-priests’ custom of recording the arrival of
sheep and of examining the state of their various internal parts might
not seem so strange. Once again, of course, the reader will expect
that this possibility has been carefully examined and found wanting,
so it will be something of a surprise to learn that the actual
Babylonian character for the wandering star, lubai, literally means
stray sheep! In addition, the observation often relate to a particular
ring in the sky (the zodiac) whose literal meaning is that of a fence or
stream enclosing a sheep meadow. The records we interpret, in other
words, do not distinguish between sheep and stars! The actual
imagery indeed is of sheep that are scuttling around a pen in the sky,
developing ailments that have some adverse consequences so far as
our livelihood down here is concerned. Why then are the cuneiform
scholars so perverse as not to take this imagery at face value? Why do
they insist on understandings of the data which are either
sacrilegious or mundane? Presumably, it is because they have been
unable to relate any known astronomical phenomenon to any image
of sheep scuttling around the sky that is also threatening.
Fortunately, it is possible to resolve the question of what the
astronomer-priests were doing by examining the way in which omen
astrology developed. Thus, although the political power of Babylon
was in due course eclipsed, the city maintained a thousand-year-old
uninterrupted tradition of culture and learning which eventually, in
the first millennium BC, attracted the admiration of much younger
states. Indeed from the seventh century onwards, we find Persians,
Jews and Greeks alike, all apparently drawn to Babylon by the
magnet of ‘Chaldean’ science, sparking off something akin to a
renaissance in the cosmopolitan atmosphere of easy communication
and competition that then seemed to emerge. However it should be
kept in mind that a revival of interest in the sky can also be sparked
off by events in the sky itself. Whatever the setting, Babylonian
mathematics and astrology experienced a great revival which
continued into the so-called Seleucid period, and it is perhaps no
surprise to find visitors such as Zarathustra and Pythagoras, like
Abraham much earlier, being proclaimed in their own lands as the
inventors of all science and the creators of astrology and numberwisdom, each then asserting himself as the oldest and hence the
teacher of mankind. 19
Plate 2. Final Judgement. Based on a sixteenth-centary fresco at
the Dionysian Monastery Mount Athos in Northern Greece
(Roger Bargue). Note the highly realistic portrait of a meteor
shower associated with seismic disturbance and divine control.
In later chapters, we shall be tracing the thread of science along its
labyrinthine path through ancient Greece and the empires of
Macedon and Rome to the present day. Pliny, for example, will
inform us that ‘fleece’ was still a commonplace term for comets at the
beginning of this era (chapter 6). But more to the point, paths cast
also carried the theory and practice of Babylonian astrology through
Persia and India to China where it experienced yet another
renaissance towards the end of the first millennium AD. 20 And here,
at last, there can be little doubt about what the astrologers were
doing. 21 Their preoccupation was first and foremost with the
detection of ‘guest stars’ and with the enumeration of fireballs, the
former now know to be largely comets and the latter, those extrabright meteors, now known to be largely their offspring. But, as
Schafer has recently remarked in relation to the acknowledged status
of these practices, ‘where the historian of Chinese science [now]
tends to be concerned with the accuracy of such ratios and
measurements as the obliquity of the ecliptic and the length of the
year, the astrologers of the T’ang [were] more concerned with the
benign or alarming visions that signaled to them from the black
vault’.
Even today there are sky-watchers around the world who continue in
the Babylonian tradition of Chinese astrologers and occasionally
observe the diminishing tail of a fading comet, or record the arrival
of shooting stars. But one thing is certain: they do not commonly
reflect on what the ancients may have been doing when they
examined the dwindling entrails or registered a count in the presence
of incident sheep. The thought that a dead comet might
metamorphose into a dangerous swarm of ‘hidden stars’ is one that
the fashions and prejudices of the present day do not allow. Logic
requires us to keep our shepherd-kings in the ancient sky and regard
them as a myth!
The problem then is one of interpretation. The Babylonian astrologer
did indeed describe the danger in the sky. Furthermore, throughout
history, observers have made the link between catastrophe down
here and danger up there. Cuneiform scholars are not of course
unaware of the ambiguities that arise out of the fact that the earliest
sky-watchers were shepherds. There must therefore be a deeper
conviction to which they subscribe, namely that the sky does not,
after all, harbor any danger. In the chapters that follow, we shall
attempt to trace how this conviction came about and consider
whether it has any basis in fact.