
10 — Cosmic Swarms
Between 3 and 15 November each year, the Earth runs through a
meteor stream coming from a small area in the constellation of
Taurus the bull. A young stream, made up of meteors not long
released from their parent comet, would be narrow and probably
strong, and the Earth would pass through it in half a day or so. The
Geminid meteor stream is one such, the Earth encountering it on the
December each year and the shower being over by 12 December The
Taurid meteor stream, on the other hand, takes the Earth 12 days to
cross, and it is not very intense; it ‘looks old’. It has two main
branches, northern and southern, emerging from slightly different
parts of the constellation, the branches being of about equal
intensity.
The Earth runs into the same meteor complex in the summer but the
meteors, striking the day-time hemisphere of the planet, are not then
visible to the naked eye. This day-time stream, the so-called Beta
Taurids, was discovered with radar using the Jodrell Bank radio
telescope in the 1950's. The Beta Taurids come in between 24 June
and 6 July with a sharp peak on 30 June each year. The orbits of
these daytime Taurids match those of the southern Taurids closely.
At first sight it seems that there is nothing exceptional about the
Taurids; they are only one of seven or eight strong meteor streams
which occur at various times throughout the year, and they are not
particularly intense. To the casual observer the only noticeable
feature of the stream is the high proportion of fireballs it produces,
bright meteors which light up the landscape. Again, this is an
indication of age, smaller meteors in the stream having long ago
been destroyed in interplanetary space by processes of erosion.
Orbiting with the Taurid meteor stream is a small comet, discovered
in 1818 by Pons. An orbit was calculated for this comet by Johann
Encke, a pupil of the famous mathematician Gauss who had
developed a method for calculating the orbits of bodies from their
movement across the sky. Encke not only found an orbit, he showed
that the comet was the same as one detected by Mechain in 1786,
Caroline Herschel in 1795 and Pons himself in 1805. Encke predicted
that the comet would return in May 1822 and in due course its return
was observed, from Australia. There are interesting historical
parallels with Halley’s Comet; in both cases the comet is named, not
after the discoverer, but after the man who calculated the orbit;
Encke’s Comet was the first instance after Halley of the recognized
return of a comet; and, like Halley’s Comet, it established the
existence of a new class of object. Its orbit, in fact, is unique amongst
the known comets.
There are about a hundred known short-period comets (say with
orbital periods less than about 12 years as against a few million years
for the long-period ones). All of these, with the sole exception of
Encke’s Comet, are in orbits which sooner or later lead to a close
encounter with Jupiter and ejection from the Solar System by the
powerful gravitational pull of that planet. But Encke’s Comet has
somehow established itself in a stable orbit such that it never comes
within the Jovian sphere of influence. It does however come close to
the Earth. In addition there may be one or two thousand asteroids
over a kilometer across in orbits which make them a potential
collision hazard with the Earth. None is more than about 10
kilometres across, their surfaces are extremely dark, and fewer than
fifty have been discovered. They are known as Apollo asteroids after
the prototype discovered in 1932. Encke’s Comet is in fact the sole
example of an active comet in an Apollo orbit. Without decay or
collision, the comet would probably continue in orbit for tens of
millions of years. The orbit is highly elongated (figure 7) and the
comet may approach to within 0.34 astronomical units of the Sun,
when its surface temperature reaches 450 degrees centigrade, and go
out to 4.1 astronomical units, when its temperature is -120 degrees
centigrade. The comet’s orbit is inclined at only 12 degrees to that of
the Earth’s. This low inclination and the shortness of the orbital
period, ensure that there is frequent interaction between the Earth
and the material of the Taurid stream, with the potential for
occasional very close encounters with Encke’s Comet. On the face of
it, then, the Taurids seem to be an elderly, diffuse meteor stream
with no peculiar characteristics other than their association with a
comet, in an unusual orbit, and just too faint to be seen with the
naked eye. There is much more to the Taurid stream, however, than
this.
In a study of fireball records from the first to the fifteenth centuries
AD, the astronomers Astapovic and Terenteva 78 found that the
fireball flux from the Taurids was much more intense a thousand
years ago (see figure 4 (b)), indeed the northern stream was then the
stronger of the two. The Soviet astronomers found that ‘Taurids were
the most powerful shower of the year in the eleventh century (with
42 fireballs belonging to them) and no shower, not even the great
ones, could be compared with them as to activity’. In the not too
distant past, therefore, the Taurids were revealing themselves as
outstanding performers in the night sky.
Two recent discoveries confirm the suspicion that the stream is a
remarkable one. The first of these is that, amongst the 80 or so
known Apollos, 6 or 7 are orbiting within the Taurid meteor stream
(table 6). There are some interesting object in table 6. Hephaistos,
for example, is the largest known Apollo asteroid, being about 10
kilometres in diameter. Its orbit closely resembles that of the comet’s
in every respect but one: the long axis is roughly at right angles to
that of the Encke orbit. The orientations of these orbits change very
slowly, only a few degrees in a millennium. It could be that Encke’s
Comet and Hephaistos were once one body, but if so they must have
separated over 20,000 years ago. Then there is Oljato, a dark
asteroid about 1.5 kilometres across. This body shows visual
evidence, through the telescope, of slight outgassing. Further, when
the Pioneer Venus probe passed near the asteroid on several
occasions in 1982 and 1983, magnetometers on board recorded
sudden changes in the magnetic field, as if the probe were passing
through magnetized gas in the wake of the asteroid. 79 It looks as if
the ‘asteroid’ is in fact an almost defunct comet. Each of these bodies
pursues an elliptical orbit around the Sun, but because of the
influence of the planets, Jupiter and Saturn in particular, these orbits
slowly evolve. The size and shape do not change greatly but the
orientation of the orbit in space does. First, relative to the mean
plane of the Solar System, the inclination of the orbit slowly
oscillates up and down; but more significant is the orientation, in the
Earth’s orbital plane, of the orbit’s long axis. If the asteroids were
unconnected with each other and with Encke’s Comet their long axes
would be orientated randomly; but they are on the whole closely
bunched. It can be shown that these is less than one chance in a
million that even three asteroids would lie so close to the orbital
track of Encke’s Comet by chance. Now it is very unlikely that these
bodies are the only ones orbiting within the Taurid meteors:
discovery of the Apollo asteroids as a whole is only about 5 per cent
complete. We are therefore led to the remarkable conclusion that
there are between one and two hundred asteroids of more than a
kilometer diameter orbiting within the Taurid meteor stream. It
seems clear that we are looking at debris from the breakup of an
extremely large object. The disintegration, or sequence of
disintegrations, must have taken place within the past twenty or
thirty thousand years as otherwise the asteroids would have spread
around the inner planetary system and be no longer recognizable as a
stream.
The second discovery, due mainly to the Czechoslovakian
astronomer Stohl, 80 is that enveloping the Taurids, Comet Encke
and these particular asteroids is a broad tube of meteoric debris. The
Earth enters this tube in April and does not emerge again until about
the end of June, entering again in October and re-emerging in
December. It seems that about half the ‘sporadic’ meteors one sees —
random shooting stars which do not seem to belong to any specific
meteor stream — are not sporadic at all, but are part of this immense
swathe of material, of which the Taurids and the bodies within it are
the core. The Stohl stream is apparently double (figure 7) due
probably to an exceptional fragmentation which, if the orbital
backtracking of several Taurid meteors by Whipple and Hamid 81 is
accepted, occurred around 2700 BC when the primary body
encountered a stray body in the asteroid belt between Mars and
Jupiter. This pronounced splitting into two streams could be
significant in view of the dual character of divinity generally
discussed in earlier chapters.
The mass of the meteoric material within the Stohl stream is 10 or 20
trillion grammes (we use trillion in the American sense of a million
million times a million). The mass of the co-orbiting asteroids is
likely to be about the same. Adding in the mass of gas and very fine
dust which must have been blown away subsequently, we find that
the original body must have been about 100 kilometres across. We
have found our giant comet!
Figure 7. Diagram showing the orbit of Comet Encke (thick line
corresponding also to the orbit of the Beta Taurids) and the two
broad meteoroidal swarms discovered by the Czechoslovakian
astronomer Stohl. The similarities between these orbits and the
general merging of these streams with the meteoroidal complex
and zodiacal cloud in the plane of the ecliptic suggest a common
origin in the past from a single giant progenitor comet.
The existence, in the not too distant past, of a giant comet in an
Apollo orbit also explains the existence of the zodiacal light. In the
early evening, or just before sunrise, this delicate, beautiful pyramid
of light can be seen rising out of the horizon, lying along the line of
the zodiacal constellations. It is best seen in the tropics, where it
rivals the Milky Way, but unlike the Milky Way it has a more regular,
smooth appearance. We have seen that the zodiacal light is made up
of light scattered from myriads of bodies orbiting between the inner
planets. It is brightest close in to the Sun, and it could be that ancient
Egyptian portrayals of the Sun as a winged disc refer to the zodiacal
‘wings’ extending from it. From the rate at which the Earth sweeps
up meteors one finds that the mass of small meteoric material in the
zodiacal cloud, say particles less than a millimeter diameter, is
perhaps 20 to 40 billion tons. About half of this belongs to the Stohl
stream. Now the particles orbiting within the cloud collide at a few
kilometers persecond, and break up, the microscopic debris
eventually spiraling into the Sun. The zodiacal cloud loses between
10 and 40 tons of mass every second in this way, and without
replenishment it would vanish in about fifty or a hundred thousand
years. And yet, there are no adequate sources of replenishment for
this dust at the present time. 82 Encke’s Comet is the major known
supplier of dust in the inner planetary system at present, but even so,
it loses only an average of a ton a second of material over an orbit,
only 0.3 tons per second of which is dust; it cannot even remotely
resupply either Stohl stream or zodiacal cloud. Once more, there
seems to be no avoiding the conclusion that the progenitor of Comet
Encke and the Stohl stream must have been a truly exceptional body,
in the same class as the great historical comets. And it must have
been pouring out dust copiously in the not too distant past, since the
Stohl stream, diffusing into the zodiacal cloud as a whole, would not
stay recognizable for more than twenty thousand years or so.
Backtracking the orbits of Encke and Oljato, we find that 9.500 years
ago the orbits were nearly identical. It is possible there was a major
disintegration of the prime body then, with much debris created of
which Comet Encke and Oljato are the largest known bodies,
followed by similar disintegrations of the other comets and asteroids
of the stream. Oljato itself is in an orbit which brought it virtually
into the Earth’s orbital plane for some centuries around 3000-3500
BC, ensuring a series of very close encounters with the Earth over the
period. If, as is very likely, it was then an active comet, it must have
been a spectacular zodiacal traveler, whose cycles of coming and
going, flaring and fading, must have made it a perplexing object in its
own right, even if overshadowed by the more formidable Encke. The
meteor orbits, traced back in time, seem also to come together at
particular epochs. The present-day northern Taurids, for example,
may have broken away from Encke’s Comet or a Taurid asteroid
about a thousand years ago, consistently with the surge of activity
recorded in the sky around that time, particularly by the Chinese
astronomers (figure 4). The whole complex therefore seems to be
undergoing an avalanching self-destruction as the debris accumulate
and collide. Orbital backtracking of the Taurid meteors and asteroids
thus reveals a system which has been evolving actively within the
timescale of civilization.
Thus unique complex of debris is undoubtedly the greatest collision
hazard facing the Earth at the present time. It is likely that hundreds
of thousands of bodies, each capable of yielding a multi-megaton
explosion on Earth, are orbiting within the stream. Such bodies are
expected from the progressive disintegration of the asteroids —
inactive comets — with it. From time to time collisions will remove
some proportion of the dusty crust from an asteroid, exposing its icy
interior. It will then become a comet for a few centuries. Probably,
also, there are one or more concentrations of material — temporary
swarms — arising from the rapid disintegration of one or two
dominant but yet undiscovered bodies within the Taurid stream. The
Moon, as we have noted already, ran through such a swarm between
22-26 June 1975. Lunar seismometers left by the Apollo astronauts
recorded the impacts of a swarm of ton-sized boulders, as many
hitting the Moon over those five days as had struck it over the
previous five years (figure 6).
We seem to have found, then, the vital element missing form the
works of the early Biblical catastrophists — Whiston, Radlof,
Donnelly, Velikovsky and the rest — namely, a scientific rationale, a
relatively secure astronomical framework. Biblical and geological
catastrophism are, after all, inextricably linked. While this clearly
justifies an urgent reappraisal of the ancient tales of celestial
catastrophe, the new information is extremely awkward for a
generation of astronomers who insisted that Velikovsky was no more
than an erudite charlatan. Astronomers, indeed scientists generally,
like to think themselves as tolerant judges and very adaptable to
fresh discoveries. The evidence in this instance is however mostly the
other way. One may therefore expect that in some circles the data
now emerging from the Taurid meteor stream will be ignored in the
hope that something reassuring will turn up. While this is a timehonoured scholarly ploy for the handling of discordant new facts,
there is a moral dimension in this instance: the swarm has teeth. As
to how sharp these teeth can be, we shall now see by looking at two
impacts which have taken place during the present millennium.