
11 — Close Encounters
Just after 7:15 am local time on 30 June 1908, in the central Siberian
plateau, there took place an impact of ferocious intensity. Yet so
isolated and vast is this region (half as large again as the USA), it was
almost twenty years before the Western world became aware of the
event. 83
On the night of 30 June and 1 July, the sky throughout Europe was
strangely bright. Throughout the United Kingdom, over 3,000 miles
from the point of impact, it was possible to play cricket and read
newspapers by the glow from the night sky. From Belgium came
descriptions of a huge red glow over the horizon, after sunset, as if a
great fire was raging. This strangely bright sky was seen throughout
Europe, European Russia, Western Siberia and as far south as the
Caucasus mountains. Photographs were taken at midnight or later,
with exposures of about a minute, in Sweden, in Scotland, and as far
east as the university city of Kazan, on the banks of the river Volga.
And yet the Urals, dividing Europe from Asia, are 400 miles east of
Kazan, and the impact point was over 1,200 miles beyond that again.
Much comment was excited in newspapers and learned journals at
the time. Some thought that icy particles had somehow formed high
in the atmosphere and were reflecting sunlight. Others considered
that a strange auroral disturbance was involved. The Danish
astronomer Kohl drew attention to the fact that several very large
meteors had recently been observed over Denmark and thought that
comet dust in the high atmosphere might account for the
phenomenon. But there was no agreement as to what had happened.
Over 500 miles to the south of the fall, a seismograph in the city of
Irkutsk near Lake Baikal, close to the Mongolian border, registered
strong earth tremors.
Nearly 400 miles south-west of the explosion, at 7:17 am on 30 June,
a train driver on the Trans-Siberian express had to halt the train for
fear of derailment due to the tremors and commotion.
Fierce gusts of wind were felt in towns 300 to 400 miles away.
In an Irkutsk newspaper dated 2 July it was reported that, in a
village more than 200 miles from the Tunguska river, peasants had
seen a fireball brighter than the sun approach the ground, followed
by a huge cloud of black smoke, a forked tongue of flame and a loud
crash as if from gunfire. ‘All the villagers ran into the street in panic.
The old women wept and everyone thought the end of the world was
approaching’.
Almost twenty years later, a farmer recalled that, 125 miles from the
point of impact:
When I sat down to have my breakfast beside my plough, I
heard sudden bangs, as if from gunfire. My horse fell on its
knees. From the north side above the forest a flame shot up.
Then I saw that the fir forest had been bent over by the wind and
I thought of a hurricane. I seized hold of my plough with both
hands so that it would not be carried away. The wind was so
strong that it carried off some of the soil from the surface of the
ground, and then the hurricane drove a wall of water up the
Angora.
From another village at the same distance out, the local newspaper
reported that:
A noise as from a strong wind was heard, followed by a fearful
crash, accompanied by a subterranean shock ... This was
followed by two equally forceful blows and an extraordinary
underground roar like the sound of a number of trains passing
simultaneously over rails .... a heavenly body of fiery appearance
cut across the sky ... when the flying object touched the horizon,
a huge flame shot up that cut the sky in two.
Forty miles out, at the Vanavara trading post, a farmer was sitting on
the porch of his home. He reported:
I saw a huge fireball that covered an enormous part of the sky ...
the whole northern sky appeared to be covered with fire. I felt a
great heat as if my shirt had caught fire. Afterwards it became
dark and at the same time I felt an explosion that threw me
several feet from the porch. I lost consciousness.
At this distance too, ‘the ground shook and an incredible long
pronounced roaring was heard. Everything round about was
shrouded in smoke and fog from the burning and fallen trees’.
The closest eyewitness description came from a family in a tent 25
miles south-east of the epicentre. The family had been thrown in the
air and several were knocked out. When they recovered they found
the forest ablaze around them and much of it devastated. It is not
unlikely that some nomadic herdsmen were closer to the centre of
the impact; if so, they would have perished in the blast. A thousand
reindeer may have been killed as well.
Local Siberian newspapers carried stories of a fireball in the sky, and
a fearful explosion, but by the autumn of 1908 these stories had died
out, and they went unnoticed in St Petersburg (Leningrad), Moscow
and the west. The region was arguably one of the most inaccessible
places on Earth, in the centre of Siberia. It comprises swamps, huge
pine forests and peat bogs. It was populated only by nomadic
reindeer herdsmen (the Tungus, now renamed Evenki) and large,
ferocious mosquitoes. However rumours of an extraordinary event
persisted, transmitted back by geologists and other intrepid
researchers working in the area. These attracted the attention of a
meteorite researcher, Leonard Kulik, who in 1921 led an expedition
travelling from Petrograd (Leningrad) on the Trans-Siberian express
across the Urals into Siberia, stopping finally at Kansk. Here he
learned that the impact must have taken place hundreds of miles to
the north, near the Tunguska river. It was not until 1927 that an
expedition, again led by Kulik, finally penetrated to the site of the
1908 explosion.
Through this expedition, and others which followed, the event may
be recreated. The fireball was blindingly bright, even dimming the
Sun in comparison, and was seen over an area almost 1,000 miles
across. It approached on a shallow trajectory from a roughly
southern direction, leaving a thick dust trail and crossing the sky in a
few seconds. After it had disappeared from the sky, a vertical column
of fire was seen over the impact site, and was visible from as far away
as 300 miles.
Deafening explosions were heard, followed by thunder and rumbling,
the explosion being heard over a circular area almost 900 miles
across, the concussion wave being enough to throw many witnesses
to the ground. Over this area also buildings were shaken by ground
tremors. (It was later learned that seismographs had detected these
as far away as the USA and Java). The object seems to have
disintegrated at about 5 miles altitude, halted by the atmosphere,
effectively converting its energy of motion into heat and so creating a
ball of fire. It broke up over an area known as the Southern Swamp, a
depression 4 to 7 miles across consisting of peat bogs and swamps.
Surrounding this area was forest, flattened and uprooted by the blast
to a distance of about 40 miles, although the shock waves extended
almost 70 miles out. Some trees remained standing, shipped of their
branches. Out to a distance between 10 and 20 miles from the
epicentre, brushwood and trees had been scorched on their inward
facing sides.
The energy of the explosion has been calculated from the extent of
the flattened forest, and from the small pressure waves which arrived
at the speed of sound and were record on barographs around the
world, 84 the latter calculation being the more reliable. The wave
trains were unlike any others which have been recorded up until that
time but resemble those obtained from a hydrogen bomb explosion
(figure 8). It seems that the impact had an energy of 30 to 40
megatons, about that from a few dozen ordinary hydrogen bombs,
and similar to the Boulder City impact of the prologue.
Figure 8. Pressure waves from the Tunguska explosion detected
in south-east England 5,720 km from the impact. For
comparison, pressure waves from hydrogen bomb explosions
are shown also: Bikini to barograph at Aspendale 5,920 km, and
Novaya Zemlaya to Aspendale 14,000 km. from this an impact
energy of about 30 megatons can be inferred. From E.L.Deacon
(note 84).
The date of fall (30 June) corresponds to the passage of the Earth
through the maximum of the Beta Taurid stream. 85 From this and
its trajectory, it appears that the Tunguska object was part of the
Taurid complex. Probably, the Earth passed through a swarm within
the stream. The occurrence, this century, of an impact with the
energy of a hydrogen bomb does give cause for some concern, and it
is interesting to speculate on whether one’s historical perceptions
would be quite the same had the bolide struck an urban area or a
city. As it happens, however, the Tunguska impact is fairly trivial:
In this year, on the Sunday before the Feast of St. John the
Baptist, after sunset when the moon had first become visible a
marvelous phenomenon was witnessed by some five or more
men who were sitting there facing the moon. Now there was a
bright new moon, and as usual in that phase its horns were tilted
toward the east; and suddenly the upper horn split in two. From
the midpoint of the division a flaming torch sprang up, spewing
out, over a considerable distance, fire, hot coals, and sparks.
Meanwhile the body of the moon which was below writhed, as it
were, in anxiety, and, to put it in the words of those who
reported it to me and saw it with their own eyes, the moon
throbbed like a wounded snake. Afterwards it resumed its
proper state. This phenomenon was repeated a dozen times or
more, the flame assuming various twisting shapes at random
and then returning to normal. Then after these transformations
the moon from horn to horn, that is along its whole length, took
on a blackish appearance. The present writer was given this
report by men who saw it with their own eyes, and are prepared
to stake their honour on an oath that they have made no
addition or falsification in the above narrative.
This curious report is written in the chronicles of the medieval monk
known as Gervase of Canterbury. The year of the event was AD 1178
and the date, 18 June on the co-called Julian calendar, converts to
the evening of 25 June on the modern Gregorian one. If real, it is
clear that some extraordinary event on the Moon is being described,
and the meteorite expert Hartung 86 proposed that what was
observed and recorded 800 years ago was the impact of a body on
the Moon. The flame, he suggested, was the writhing of incandescent
gases, or sunlight reflecting from dust thrown out of the crater. The
blackish appearance of the Moon along its whole length was a
temporary suspension of dust buoyed up by a transient atmosphere.
Of course, a tale recorded by a medieval monk, by itself, need not
signify much, although the date is suggestive. But it happens that in
this case there is a strong physical evidence in support. The Moon’s
surface is sprinkled with impact craters, fossil remnants of past
collisions with small bodies; and because the lunar surface is very
old, the craters represent the accumulated history of four billion
years of bombardment. Hartung deduced that if there was a crater, it
would be at least 7 miles in diameter, possess bright rays extending
from it for at least seventy miles, and would lie between 30 and 60
north, 75 and 105 east on the Moon. These co-ordinates are the
equivalent of latitude and longitude on Earth and are measured,
roughly, from the nearest point of the Moon facing the Earth. The
crater would therefore lie very near the edge of the Moon or possibly
be just over it, on the far side.
As it happens, one crater with the predicated characteristics exists.
There is a crater named after the seventeenth-century heretic
Giordano Bruno (see plate 16). This crater is located 36 N and 105 E,
within the predicted area. It is 13 miles in diameter and is
distinguished by its remarkable brightness, and by the brilliant
system of rays which extend several hundred miles out form it. Such
rays are not uncommon around lunar craters; they are formed by
debris thrown far beyond the crater rim during the explosive
excavation. Any binoculars turned to the full Moon show such a ray
system radiating out from the young crater Tycho; this crater is
about 40 miles across and its ray system extends over much of the
facing atmosphere of the Moon. Giordano Bruno lies just beyond the
edge of the Moon and its rays are not visible form the Earth.
Nevertheless, Lunik and Apollo missions have revealed that the
crater and its ray system are impressively brilliant, even although
they come from the crater only a fraction of the size of Tycho. The
significance is that bombardment by microscopic particles and gas
atoms has no had time to dull the material around the crater. It has
been very freshly exposed.
Plate 16. The Giordano Bruno crater on the Moon, photographed
during the ill-fated Apollo 13 mission. Note the strikingly vivid
(i.e. fresh) rays indicative of recent formation (by kind
permission of the Johnson Space Center Mapping Science
Laboratory ).
Further evidence in support of the identification was forthcoming
from an investigation carried out by the lunar astronomers Callame
and Mulholland. 87 They found that although the crater was 15 into
the far side of the Moon the ejecta would be hurled such distances
that ‘the event would not have been only visible but sufficiently
apocalyptic to have justified the description given in the Canterbury
Chronicle’. They also found direct evidence in the form of a small
natural vibration of the Moon. Although the Moon rotates so that the
same face is always pointing towards the Earth, there are also small
oscillations about this position. Some of these can be stimulated by
an impact, in the same way that the a weight suspended on a rope
can be set swinging by a blow. A blow on the scale needed to excavate
Giordano Bruno would have yielded a tiny wobble of the Moon about
its polar axis, a surface movement of no more than a few metres,
with the period of three years. Detection of such a movement by eye
form 380,000 kilometers would be impossible even with the most
powerful telescopes. There is, however, another way.
Since the early 1970's, laser ranging of the Moon has become
possible because of reflections left on the lunar surface by the Apollo
and Lunik landing missions. Once a week since 1973, a laser beam is
fired from the McDonald Observatory in Texas towards one of these
reflectors and the arrival of the returning light is timed to about a
billionth of a second. Several thousand such observations have been
made over the years and much fine structure in the motion of the
Moon has been found. Many new results have come from these
observations, one of them being the discovery of a 15-metre
oscillation of the lunar surface about its polar axis, with a period of
about three years. This mode of vibration dies out over twenty
thousand years or so, and the result can only be explained by a recent
large impact, whose magnitude was about that required to form the
Bruno crater.
Many studies of impact cratering have been carried out, and for a
given size of crater it is possible to infer the energy of the impact
which created it. It turns out that the Giordano Bruno crater was
probably caused by a missile a mile or so across stinking the Moon
with an energy of about 100,000 megatons, or about ten times the
combined nuclear arsenals of east and west.
The Giordano Bruno event took place in the century when the Taurid
fireball flux was at a peak (see figure 4). It is remarkable that the
terrestrial implications of this extraordinary event seem to have gone
generally unrecognized. 88 The damage from blast and heat alone
caused by such an impact on land would be far greater than that
described in our opening story; probably, it would cause prompt
destruction of life over continental dimensions; and probably too, it
would have even more disastrous effects through the global climatic
catastrophe. And yet the effective target area of the Moon is only
about a twentieth that of the Earth, and the impact, if the
interpretation given above is correct, took place less than a
millennium ago, when the Taurid meteors were highly active. The
basic thesis of this book is that the terrestrial environment is a good
deal more hazardous than has been realized so far. In the Bruno
impact, it would be hard to find a more dramatic confirmation.
At the moment of the Bruno impact the Moon was low in the sky
over much of Europe, being visible east of a line stretching from
Oslo, Stockholm, southern England, north-west France and Spain,
and along the south-east coast of Brazil. It seems very likely that
others saw and recorded the Bruno or similar events. It may be that,
tucked away in the archives and libraries of the great European
monasteries, further evidence of crucial importance still exists.
To sum up, we now know that over 22-26 June 1975, the Moon
suffered an intense bombardment of boulders; that on 30 June 1908
a 30-megaton or so impact took place in northern Siberia; and that
on 25 June 1178 an impact of energy about 100,000 megatons
appears to have taken place on the Moon, during an epoch when the
Taurid fireballs were highly active on Earth. And we now realize that
these disasters from the sky are associated with swarms of asteroidal
material which emerge from time to time out of the constellation
Taurus.
It is now abundantly clear that we are faced with a sky far removed
from the harmless one with which we have been presented by
generations of scholars. We are approaching the state where a
quantitative assessment of the hazards facing us can be attempted.
But first, armed with these new astronomical insights, let us take a
fresh look at old evidence: let us test our new model against the
ancient tales of celestial catastrophe.