
12 — Ancient Echoes
Archeology, archaeoastronomy, mythology, classical history and so
on have long been studied under the assumption that the night sky
of, say, three thousand years ago was no different from the one we
see now. 89 Certainly the slow movement of the celestial pole
amongst the stars is generally recognized; also, past eclipses can be
dated by astronomers to coincide with those known from ancient
history sources. This gives a strong prima facie colour to the
comfortable view of an orderly, stable universe. Let us summarize
the astronomical evidence which reveals that this assumption can no
longer be justified.
As little as a thousand years ago, we have seen, the sky was
dominated by fireball activity emerging from the Taurus
constellation, accompanied probably by an impact which, had it been
terrestrial rather than lunar, would have made it unnecessary to
write this book. Three or four thousand years ago, the whole Taurid
complex must have been larger and more active. Orbiting within it
were active comets, celestial objects travelling along the zodiac and
easily visible to any shepherd tending his flock by night. Encke’s
Comet is dying rapidly and will become an asteroid within about 50
years; but in the century after its discovery the comet is known to
have been seen as a naked eye object about a dozen times. Even
today, if it were just a little brighter we would now have a ghostly
zodiacal traveler coming and going in the night sky in a series of
complicated cycles, as easily seen as the planets but a good deal more
perplexing.
Going into the more remote past, we enter periods of history when
the celestial fireworks from the cometary material were much more
dramatic. Even in fairly recent historical times the Taurid stream has
been active: this is evidenced, not only by the medieval observations
but also by orbital backtracking of meteors and by the fact that there
seems to be an intense meteoric core to the Taurid stream even
today, manifesting itself as a swarm (figure 6). If the meteors were
more than say 10,000 years old the stream would be unrecognizably
dispersed; easily visible cometary activity has therefore, in all
probability, been taking place throughout that period and beyond.
The disintegration history of the giant comet itself probably covers
tens of thousands of years. Alone or as part of a small number of
major comets, it probably released enough dust to initiate the last ice
age, a wintry drama par excellence which reached a peak around
20,000 years ago. Dusty streamers from the comet, lying in the plane
of the zodiac, must have been easily associated with the main comet
and its meteors.
In neolithic and early historical times, then, a string of naked-eye
comets was moving along the zodiac much like the planets, still
active debris from a hierarchy of disintegrations of the major body.
Encke’s comet could be the remnant core of the original body; or it
could be merely one of the several hundred remnant Apollo asteroids
which was re-activated for a few centuries, perhaps by a recent
collision breaking through its dusty surface. At any one time, it is
likely that there were one or a very few dominant bodies. It is
expected that there were major splitting from these from time to
time over the centuries. Some of the smaller fragments would be
transient in the extreme; others, respectable comets in their own
right, would persist for centuries of millennia. The slow evolution of
the cometary orbits ensures that, at a brief epochs in the past, the
orbital tracks of the major comet and Earth intersected (see, for
example, figure 9).close encounters with the major, active fragment,
over these centuries, must have been spectacular if not terrifying,
with the comet nucleus, brighter then Venus, crossing the sky in a
few hours, accompanied by a complex, striated red tail bisecting the
sky. Meteor storms of ferocious intensity, recurring annually when
the Earth crossed the debris of the comet, must have taken place
during these epochs, the shooting stars blazing out from a small
region of sky in Taurus or Aries. On some such occasions the sky
must have been filled with brilliant fireballs, such storms lasting for
several hours. Some of these fireballs would on occasion reach the
upper atmosphere or the ground, and there would be explosions,
there could be no doubting the association of these spectacular
phenomena with the supreme being in the sky.
Figure 9. Intersection points (nodes) of Comet Encke’s orbit
with the plane containing the Earth’ orbit, at various dates
before the present (BP). During the first millennium BC up to
the time of Chirst, the orbit of the comet or that of its associated
dust trail would have intersected that of the Earth, leading at
this time to annual fireball storms of amazing intensity.
Such close encounters with the Earth, although spectacular, would
however be rare. A comet increases rapidly in brightness as it
approaches the Sun, and a more usual manifestation of the cosmic
debris would be the regular appearance of one of the major
fragments as a spectacular object in the morning and evening sky.
As the millennia passed, the comets lost their volatile gases, their
tales diminished and the comets eventually faded from sight. It is
likely, however, that one or a few strong meteor showers remained,
repeating annually and predictably. Of these, the Taurid meteor
shower — really a complex of closely similar showers — was
undoubtedly outstanding. Throughout the year an intense zodiacal
light must have been visible, in the pre-down and post-dusk skies, as
a pillar stretching upwards from the Sun. During the night, twin
pillars would still be visible rising on each side from opposing
horizons. Patches of light, due to concentrations of debris released in
past disintegrations of the prime body, would seem to drift through
the constellations of the zodiac. As we enter the pre-Christian era,
even these signs gradually faded from sight until today, only a faint
zodiacal light and an ancient, diffuse meteor stream remain as visible
signs.
To summarize, we expect:
1. intense annual fireball activity emerging annually from the
Taurus/Aries region, this activity reaching prodigious levels on
occasion;
2. comets, with perhaps one or two dominating, regularly
tracking along the zodiacal path in the night sky, with occasional
spectacular encounters;
3. one or two comets regularly visible as a brilliant object in the
morning and evening sky; and
4. pillars, patches and streams of light in the night sky, lying
along a bright zodiac.
In table 7 we list some of the overlapping timescales of human and
astronomical interest. It makes little sense (or so it seems to us) to
try to understand the ancient traditions of celestial catastrophe while
ignoring these new results. Such matters as the Bronze Age
destructions and the traditions of crisis — the word coming to an end
through celestial fire and so on — have to be looked at anew. We have
no illusions about the problems involved in this programme: there is
a heavy intellectual investment in prevailing interpretations and
small adjustments to them will not necessarily do. Nevertheless, it
seems that the cosmic message has been handed down through the
millennia; and the experts have failed to interpret the archaic code.
Very approximate. The slowness of human development during
the ice age contrasts noticeably with the speed of cultural
evolution following its end. There is much overlap of
astronomical and cultural timescales, and indeed the zodiacal
cloud and Taurid meteors are visible even now, while Encke’s
comet is just below naked-eye visibly. In antiquity, with the
complex of debris much more active. It is likely that the prime
comet, lesser comets, and debris were regularly visible in the
zodiac, and associated with fierce annual fireball showers and
occasional impacts.
In seeking evidence of the ancient turbulent sky, we should not
necessarily expect descriptions, perhaps four or five thousand years
old, to be given in modern scientific terms. We do not seek comets
tracking along the zodiacal but gods wandering along a celestial
river; rather than evanescent patches of light we should seek
temporary celestial islands; rather than fireball swarms and a
Tunguska impact we expect celestial thunderbolts hurled in anger;
and in tales of the world’s end, we should be alert for indications that
celestial catastrophe came specifically out of the constellation Taurus
the Bull, or in more remote epochs, because of the evolution of the
meteor orbits, out of the neighbouring constellation Aries the Ram.
In interpreting ancient and frequently obscure texts dealing with the
sky, and the evolution through the ages of ideas about the universe
and its celestial gods, a proper methodological approach is required:
it is incorrect to ignore the actual astronomical environment. Many
interpretations of the gods and their adventures could be made to
seem plausible, and in these tales have been seen visitors from outer
space and planets hurtling past the Earth. This relative
indeterminacy applies equally to ‘standard’ interpretations based on
the assumption of a constant night sky: thus if these are to be upheld,
the presence of Taurid phenomena in ancient cosmic cultures,
exclusive associations with the Bull or the Ram, has to be explained.
In the final analysis, if the constraints imposed by the real
astronomical surroundings are not applied, there is little to choose
between one school of thought which sees in myth only eclipse
dragons, another which sees only alien spacemen, and yet another
which sees nothing at all.
One of the most remarkable and widespread beliefs held in early
civilizations was that of a god in the sky. 90 Even in the Nile valley,
where the Sun was eventually a principle object of worship, there was
an earlier celestial religion, older even than the dynasties of the
pharaohs. In the Pyramid Texts this early god is shown as the giver of
life, of rain, and of ‘celestial fire’. Worship of a sky god has been the
dominant religious feature of the Indo-European and Semitic
peoples from the earliest times. As these groups spread into Asia,
India and the eastern Mediterranean, they took their Supreme Being
with them.
A properly held view is that the idea of a Supreme Being developed
from the primitive animism of the savage. The story goes that, out of
the primitive belief that every tree and breath of wind was alive,
there evolved the belief in a multitude of gods, and that out of this
polytheism in turn these arose the higher belief in a single Supreme
Deity. It is a view which is still popularly held and promulgated.
However the result of anthropological researches has been to show
that the Supreme Beings of primitive cultures have always been such
and have never been 'lower-order’ gods or heroes. If anything the
evolution has been in the reverse direction, the tendency to create
gods being seen, for example, in the proliferation of saints in the
Roman Catholic faith. An interesting further finding of this research
is that, even in the earliest times, the sky god never existed alone: he
was always accompanied by other divine creatures.
Another popular misconception is that the early sky god, like the
modern conception of God, was an abstraction. More probably, he
was something physically real in the sky, and historians of religion
have usually regarded the Supreme Deity as the ‘physical sky’ itself.
Thus behind the Semitic and Indo-European belief in a celestial
Supreme Being ‘no doubt lay an earlier cult of the sky in which the
vault of heaven was deified and associated with transcendental gods
and supramundane powers who dwelt in exalted seclusion in the
celestial regions’. According to the historian James, the cult of a sky
god is very ancient, probably going back at least to the late stone age.
Nor was the original deity a mere weather god. Zeus hurling his
thunderbolts from the summit of Mount Olympus is easily seen as a
personification of thunder and lightning but there appears to have
been an older, celestial Zeus behind this creature. When the IndoEuropean tribes migrated through southern Russian and along the
Danube, some of them settled in Thessaly, near Mount Olympus,
around 2000 BC (chapter 3). They installed their gods on the
mountain, under the leadership of Zeus, and in due course Zeus
became associated with the weather. But as James points out, he
never lost his earlier, celestial connections, the very name coming
form a root div meaning ‘the bright sky’. Their adventures, too, were
firmly celestial, Zeus and his followers battling it out with Chronos
and his allies in the sky, sending them ‘migrating beyond the
horizon, heaven knows where’. An illustrative hint of an earlier
cometary Zeus is seen in the very old myth in which Zeus was hidden
by his mother Rhea from his father Chronos. Because Chronos
swallowed his offspring to prevent them dethroning him, Rhea hid
Zeus in cave. There he was suckled by a goat, and from the cavern
‘fire flashed forth annually when the blood from the birth of Zeus
streamed forth’. Given the cosmological setting of much early myth
(see chapter 13), it is difficult to make sense of this story except in
terms of an annual meteor stream; but if so, Zeus was, in this myth, a
comet. In similar vein, the thunderbolts of the deities were not
thunder or lightning. Take, for example, Zeus’s response 91 to an
imposter Salmoneus who was flinging lighted torches at the sky:
according to Apollodorus, ‘Zeus struck him with a thunderbolt, and
wiped out the city he had founded with all its inhabitants’. Some
lightning! Whatever authority one may ascribe to Apollodorus, it is
clear from many such remarks by classical writers that the
thunderbolts of Zeus were regarded as something quite out of the
ordinary.
In the earliest times then, probably going back to the Stone Age, a
Supreme Being was worshipped. This being was physically real,
celestial, it wielded thunderbolts, and was frequently accompanied
by other, lesser celestial deities whose nature we shall investigate in
due course.
In The Cosmic Serpent we proposed that some of the major celestial
deities were originally comets, derived from the break-up of the giant
progenitor. As the comets faded from sight, the tales of their
adventures, handed down as myth, gradually became meaningless to
the tellers and their listener. However the gods were plainly celestial
creatures, and at a later stage of this evolution the names of the chief
celestial deities were transferred to the planets, which then,
paradoxically, acquired the cometary characteristic of the ancient
tales. The bizarre adventures of the celestial Zeus (or Jupiter) for
example, did not therefore refer, a la Velikovsky, to the planet now of
that name, but to something else.
In fact, as noted previously, the evidence is that names like Jupiter
and Saturn were superimposed on the planets in the sky at a
relatively late period. The history of the names of the planets can
only be traced back with confidence to about 600 BC. Table 4 shows
the names which were attached to the planets from that time
onwards. Democritus (around 430 BC) did not name the planets and
even said he did not know how many there are. The attachment of
gods to planets seems to have originated with the Babylonians, who
gave two names to the planets, a ‘scientific’ one and a ‘divine’ one. It
may be no coincidence that a revolution in religious attitudes took
place from roughly 600 BC onwards. In the words of one
authority: 92
If we compare the religious attitude of the period before -700
with the period after -300, we detect a tremendous difference.
No matter whether we direct our attention to Greece, Egypt or
Asia, the differences are everywhere of the same kind. The
triumphal advance of cosmic religion and its attendant astrology
is an international phenomenon ... After 600 BC we can observe
the invasion of the Greek world by new ideas and the onset of
doubts about the traditional gods. The new ideas induced
powerful reactions, such as the condemnation of Anaxagoras for
atheism and the execution of Socrates for ‘worship of new gods’,
[see chapter 6]
The old-time religion, the Babylonian-Assyrian worship of celestial
deities, was replaced by new cults and new sets of gods to worship:
Mithraism, Zervanism, Orphism flourished in the sixth century BC,
only to be themselves supplanted by religions with distinctly
monotheistic tendencies and which tended to see the supreme god as
an abstraction.
This revolution came after a long period of stability in worship. One
might, following custom, attempt to explain it in purely human
terms. Independent cities in the Mediterranean — Phoenician,
Etruscan but above all Greek — began to move ahead in trade,
literacy, technology and democracy, and one might reasonably
speculate that the social revolution led the religious one rather than
the converse. However, it is not then clear what caused the social
revolution in the first place. If, on the other hand, the sky gods were
cometary, the universal change in religious attitudes can be simply
understood if the original sky gods had merely faded away. There is
in fact good evidence that the sky gods did indeed have cometary
characteristics. The Babylonian scholar Ilse Fuhr 93 has carried out a
study of an ancient Oriental symbol, the socalled omega symbol, and
spiral markings associated with it. This symbol is most commonly
found on stone carvings and so on dating from the first and second
centuries BC but its roots go back much further, probably into
prehistory. Unlike other ancient symbols, the appearance of the
omega symbol changes considerably from one artifact to another.
From its appearance, and its obvious celestial connections, Fuhr has
deduced that the omega symbols are representations of comets.
Plate 17. (opposite) Boundary stone invoking the gods: the
omega (comet) symbol appears along with other Babylonian
deities such as Anu and Enlil (Cliché des Musées Nationaux,
Paris).
The largest, although not the oldest, group of relics on which the
omega symbol is found are the boundary stones, used to delineate
territorial boundaries. Marked on these stones are gods, placed as
warnings to indicate that the wrath of the gods would descend on the
trespasser. There would seem to be nothing abstract or unreal about
these gods: symbols on the stones can be recognized as the disc of
the Sun and the crescent of the Moon. An example is shown in plate
17, where the omega symbol is placed next to symbols for Any, Ea
and Enlil.
Plate 18. An Assyrian cylinder seal in the British Museum. Over
a holy tree hovers the god Assur with wings and a tail. On each
side of the tree there is a king in duplicate. His right hand is
raised in a gesture of prayer and his left hand catches a ribbon,
and one may infer that a divine right to kinship, through
identification with the cometary god, is being represented
(reproduced by courtesy of the trustees of the British Museum).
Similar cometary attachments are associated with Mayan
glyphs.
This triad, representing the original great Mesopotamian gods,
corresponded at first to male and female deities associated with
Heaven (Anu) and Earth (Ea) respectively, the storm god (Enlil)
being their joint offspring. In the very earliest representations the
members of this triad were usually horned deities, but in later years
Anu took on more the character of the celestial equator whilst Ea and
Enlil came to symbolize the zones of the zodiac below and above the
equator respectively. This transformation is itself highly suggestive
in the context of comets for it reflects rather accurately the way in
which cometary dust will be disturbed in the sky as a result of orbital
precession over a millennium or so, under the perturbing influence
of Jupiter. Remarkably, such dust bands have been detected in the
sky with the aid of the infrared Astronomical Satellite IRAS.
Plate 19. A swastika is perhaps the most surprising symbol to be
found within this ancient Chinese classification scheme for
comets. The classification is one of several paintings on silk
recovered from a Han dynasty tomb dated 168 BC. Examples of
multiple tails and fine structure (striations) are also clearly
depicted (adapted from the identification chart for the
Mawangtui Comet Atlas, 1978).
The omega symbol is found also on coffin lids, presumably as
supplications to the gods, in the company of other sky gods symbols;
it is found on cylinder seals where kinship between a king on Earth
and a cometary deity seems to be represented (plate 18); and it is
found also on big limestone blocks from the Anu-Addad temple in
Assur, which can be dated to between 1200 and 1300 BC. Here it is
found in the company of the swastika. This now notorious symbol
appears again, a thousand years later, in China, 94 where it is clearly
intended to describe a comet in one of its many manifestations. The
origin of the swastika, an ancient (certainly prehistoric) symbol, has
always been regarded as mysterious. The facts to be explained are its
strange appearance and its universality, for it is found from India to
Mexico, from Scandinavia to China. Comets seen in the sky are
indeed a natural explanation for this ancient symbol, but not the
average transient ghosts one observes now: recurring close
encounters with active comets in the prehistoric sky are implied.
Fuhr’s identification of the swastika as a comet symbol, confirmed by
its Chinese representation (plate 19), are thus a significant
demonstration that such objects were indeed regular travelers in the
sky at night.
In fact, one of the impressive aspects of Fuhr’s study is her finding
that comets may be symbolized by spirals and swastikas, although it
must have seemed that these were quite unrealistic representations.
But sense can be made of these symbols when it is realized that gas is
emitted from a comet nucleus in jets. The gas, spiraling outwards
from the rotating nucleus, eventually merges into the surrounding
coma and is swept backwards to form the tail. But the spiral form
cannot normally be seen without a telescope. For the jets to have
been visible to the naked eye there must have been close encounters
with bright, active comets. The cup-and-ring markings often found
on prehistoric megaliths often have a cometary appearance, 95 and
spirals, swastikas and even what appear to be tail striations are to be
found amongst them (plate 20). The spiral motif is particularly
common in Minoan and Mycenean pottery and frescoes (plate 21).
The omega symbol was not confined to Babylon. Fuhr has identified
a ‘Heracles knot’, and intertwining of omegas sometimes shown as
serpents, in many artefacts throughout the near East and seen, for
example, in the columned room of the tomb of Ramasses in Thebes.
The omega was attached as a sort of label to various Egyptian gods,
such as Meschenet and Osiris, for example in a temple of Osiris in
Abydos dated around 1200-1300 BC (plate 22); and it conspicuously
represents the goddess Hathor through her coiffure (figure 10).
Hathor, who was sometimes equated with the body of the sky
goddess Nut, was often represented as a cow (plate 5).
Plate 20. Nucleus, tail and striations? Possible third millennium
cometary motif on the so-called Panorama Stone, Ilkley. Note
that the upper ring appears to be a spiral; a megalithic swastika
is also found at this locality (photo: Michael J. Stead).
It was Hathor who overthrew the earlier supreme god Atum after a
widespread massacre, Atum having grown old and weak. One of the
chief Egyptian deities, she was identified with the Greek goddess of
love. Aphrodite, in her earliest forms as the Assyrian Ishtar or the
Sumerian Innana, was rather more warlike than her Hellenized
version. A Sumerian hymn to Innana 96 gives the flavor:
My father gave me the heavens, gave me the earth.
I am Innana.
Kingship he gave me,
queenship he gave me,
waging of battle he gave me, the attack he gave me,
the floodstorm he gave me, the hurricane he gave me.
The heavens he set as a crown on my head,
the earth he set as sandals on my feet,
a holy robe he set around my body,
a holy scepter he set in my hand.
The gods are sparrows — I am a falcon;
The Annunki trundle along — I am a splendid wild cow;
I am father Enlil’s splendid wild cow,
his splendid wild cow leading the way!
The pure torch that flares in the sky,
the heavenly light,
shining bright like the day,
the great queen of heaven Innana,
I will hail.
The holy one, the awesome queen of the Annunaki,
the one revered in heaven and earth,
crowned with great horns, ...
Plate 21. Double spiral and omega motifs in Minoan pottery
(photo by permission of Princeton Univerisity Press). The spiral,
the swastika and the omega are found in numerous cultures
going back to 2000 BC at least, and may be represented of
comets, now defunct, which belonged to the Taurid swarm.
Figure 10. The sky goddess Hathor (line drawing from Ein
Altorientalisches Symbol by Ilse Fuhr). Associated with the
zodiac in ancient Egypt, she is here shown with the distinctive
coiffure representing her as a comet. From he Temple of Hathor
at Dendera. Such depictions of Hathor sate back to at least 1400
BC.
Plate 22. Deities represented as comets in ancient Egypt: a) Isis
and Osiris (defaced by a later pharaoh), as depicted in the
Temple of Osiris (defaced by a later pharaoh), as depicted in the
Temple of Osiris at Abydos. Fuhr’s ‘ancient cometary symbol’
appears here as the curious twin spiral headgear; (b) The
goddess Meschenet, likewise associated with the comet symbol
(see Ilse Fuhr, Ein Altorientalisehes Symbol). The worship of
specific gods as comets implies regular recurrence in the sky,
consistently with the astronomical evidence for the hierarchic
disintegration of a giant progenitor comet into a family of lesser
comets during the earliest historical times.
Innana is usually interpreted by scholars as the planet Venus, and in
the absence of the new astronomical information this is no doubt the
best that one could have done. However it seems that the settled,
spectacular, celestial imagery of the goddess Innana, a morning and
evening object ‘crowned with great horns’ and associated with the
omega symbolism of Hathor, is more compatible with the thesis that
the goddess was a great comet in a short-period orbit.
We need not to go further here. The idea that much imagery in the
Neolithic and bronze ages is cometary (omega symbols, spirals,
cosmic serpents and bulls) is relatively new. Likewise rituals and
cults throughout the Near East, in particular the ubiquitous fire-bull
rituals of the second millennium BC, have recently been seen as
inspired by fireball activity from the Taurus constellation quite
independently of the astronomical discoveries mentioned herein. 97
The three main astronomical legacies from those distant times are
celestial myths, calendars with their associated festivals, and
megalithic alignments. The field is vast, the attitudes adopted in the
face of these legacies are often very rigid and one may well have to
wait for the present scholarly generation to die off before a serious
re-appraisal of all this material is undertaken in depth. All we shall
try to do here is take a cursory look at one of those legacies, and see
whether it is better understood from a different point of view: let us
take a new look at the old stories.