
13 — World Ends
In a pre-literate culture, would such information as the apocalyptic
experience of a Tunguska impact be handed down through the
generations? The problem, of course, with word-of-mouth communication
is that as information is disseminated in space and time, it is likely to
become garbled with repetition. In addition, if the information is complex,
it becomes difficult to remember. Had twentieth-century communication
and transport not been available, it may well be that the Tunguska event
would have been obliterated from human memory within a few
generations.
And yet, on the other hand, some system for the verbal spread of
information, even of a technical nature, must have existed in antiquity: the
megalith builders were able to secure stable funding for the various
expensive phases of Stonehenge over long periods of time, in addition to
aligning their structures on astronomically significant points, without
benefit of written memoranda, minutes of meetings and the like. There is
evidence that the Indus, Iberian and other traders in pre-history used
astronomy to navigate, some reaching possibly as far away as China and
Indonesia. The Phoenicians appear to have rounded the Cape of Good
Hope, and the Polynesians populated the islands of the Pacific around
1500-1000 BC. All this required a knowledge of the sky, and a degree of
reliability in the transmission of technical information over long periods of
time. 98
Some indication of how this was probably achieved comes from the
Polynesian navigators of recent times. They had the ability to sail
sometimes hundreds of miles without sight of land, and yet find the
smallest islands. They did this in part through the reading of ocean wave
patterns, and in part through observations of rising and setting stars. The
stellar information was given in the form of a fictitious narrative, an
explanatory myth, easy to learn and apply. The Phaenomena, written by
the Greek Aratus (c. 315-250 BC), comprises star and constellation lore
written in poetic form, and may have its roots in the practical knowledge of
mariners of the day. It is likely that the constellations themselves, many of
which bear little resemblance to the things they are named after, were
created out of ancient and universally familiar stories. Information may
often have been transmitted, then, in the form of stories, or myth as we
would now call it.
Much insight into the nature of these ancient tales has come from studies
such as those by de Santillana, von Dechend 99 and others. These studies
represent a great advance over earlier interpretations of ancient tales as
fertility rites or whatever, or even as the idle fancies of primitive minds.
They confirm the very old suspicion that the myths had a celestial setting;
they were ‘vehicles for memorizing and transmitting certain kinds of
astronomical and cosmological information’. That is, they account to prescientific descriptions of astronomical phenomena. The tales were already
ancient by the time they were written down. Encke’s Comet, its
companions and the associated fireball swarms should indeed loom large
in the stories.
There is a preoccupation in myth with long cycles of time. This can be seen
in Indian myth especially, world ages periodically coming to an end in
celestial catastrophe. They tell us of people who are ‘unmistakably
identified, yet elusively fluid in outline. They tell of gigantic figures and
superhuman events which seem to occupy the whole living space between
heaven and earth’. This tendency to describe gods as people extended to
sky phenomena generally, geographical features often being placed in the
sky. The ‘rivers’ Oceanus and Eridanus of Greek mythology were conceived
in heaven before their transfer to earth. Conversely, ‘there are many events,
described with appropriate terrestrial imagery, that do not, however,
happen on earth’. (The ‘earth’ in myth is the zodiac, ‘dry land’ being the
band of zodiac north of the celestial equator, the ‘underworld’ or ‘waters
below’ being the southern half). The inhabitants of this celestial earth are
the assorted travelers on the zodiac.
Arising out of her 20-year study of myth, von Dechend made the claim that
the ancient tales were describing a slow celestial movement, known as the
precession of the equinoxes, several thousand years before its ‘official’
discovery by Hipparchus in 127 BC. The rotation axis of the Earth is not
fixed eternally with respect to the stars: the axis rotates slowly, like the
wobble of a spinning top, with a period of 26,000 years. The result is that
the celestial pole describes a small circle around the sky with this period, as
measured against the fixed background of the stars or the ecliptic, the
plane of motion of the Earth. The latter is traced out in the sky by the band
of zodiacal constellations along which the Sun, Moon, planets and Encke
Comet debris move. The pole star of 4,600 years ago for example, a time of
much pyramid and megalith building, was Alpha Draconis. This slow
wobble causes the equinoxes, marking the intersections of the celestial
equator and ecliptic, to drift slowly westwards through the zodiacal
constellations at a rate just perceptible within a human lifetime. During the
whole of human history, the vernal equinox has passed through only four
of the twelve constellations of the zodiac. The vernal equinox is a calendar
market, the entry of the Sun into it signaling the onset of summer. Slow
though it is, precession can be detected within a human lifetime by a slight,
progressive shift in the rising point of a star: in the words of one
commentator, all one needs is an old tree and belief in the veracity of one’s
grandfather.
It was also claimed by von Dechend that great astrological significance was
attached to precession, the grandest and slowest of celestial movements: it
was a great cycle which determined the course of human destiny. Thus
there was a Golden Age, from about 6000 to 4000 BC, when the equinox
coincided with the Milky Way (being then in Germini and Sagittarius). This
world age came to an end with a great catastrophe. The Phaethon story in
which the sun-chariot fell from the sky, setting the world alight describes
the end of this age. There followed the Silver Age (4000-2500 BC) with the
vernal equinox in Taurus, terminated again by catastrophe described for
example in a myth wherein Zeus, during an argument, tilted up a table,
causing the Flood of Deucalion. The cosmic myths then, according to von
Dechend, have the motifs:
1. Affairs on Earth are controlled by a series of world ages, each of
several thousand years’ duration.
2. Each world age is controlled and terminated by the passage of the
spring equinox from one constellation to another.
3. The opening and closing of these ages is marked by a great
catastrophe, in the form of worldwide fire or deluge or both.
It is, of course, catastrophe which catches the eye.
We do not, for our purposes, need to undertake a full critical analysis of the
claim that the precession of the equinoxes is being described in these
stories. In fact, the orbits of comets and their meteor streams precess at
rates which are comparable to those of the equinoxes, with radiants that
are very directly seen: thus, if the catastrophe that catches the eye has
anything to do with their precession, the world ages may well have to be
redefined. But for the present, the catastrophe itself is our concern. De
Santillana and von Dechend, of course, interpret the catastrophe stories as
allegory, a mere vivid way of describing the end of a world age. A few
scholars have taken the view that some extraordinary celestial event or
events, causing worldwide consternation, is being described in these tales,
but for the most part the idea of literal catastrophe has been seen as the
hunting ground of the crackpot.
Many other attempts have been made to interpret these stories in
allegorical form. One current fashion, for example, is to suppose they
represent eclipses of Moon and Sun. On this interpretation the combat is
just the chaos in Heaven caused by the eclipse. Indeed Chinese and other
myths do describe eclipses in terms of dragons swallowing Sun or Moon,
and the term draconic, applied to a lunar month connected with the eclipse
cycle, reflects this old notion. Some have supposed that the conflict
describes the passage of the seasons, some have taken them to represent
nothing more than the cycle of day and night, and others have even seen no
astronomical content in them, the stories referring to say, the clash of
religious, somehow transferred to the sky. The very variety of explanations
indicates that none is completely satisfactory, that a key factor is missing.
One has then the ‘allegorical’ interpretations of the academics and the
‘literal’ interpretations of the crackpots. We prefer the latter: the myths are
not hiding truth under layers of allegory, they are to be read simply, more
or less at face value. Of course the ancient tales may carry allegorical, moral
and many other messages, but themes like the creation myths, for example,
though coming to us in a variety of clothings, often have a basis so similar
that one might reasonably suppose thay did indeed start as accounts of outof-the-ordinary events which were independently observed
worldwide — for the stories were told in the Old World and the New. What
we must do, clearly, is take a more detailed look at the surviving accounts
of celestial catastrophe: plate 23, for example, illustrates a seventeenthcentury example of an event in 1667 evidently overlaid with a degree of
allegorical interpretation. We must see how they fit the expectations we
now have from the new astronomical knowledge.
Plate 23. Medieval bolide fall. Seventeenth-century illustration of a
swarm of fireballs: stray missies, so it was believed, resulting from a
clash of celestial armies, an idea whose origins may be traced back
several thousand years. Note the central presence of a black orb
representing the forces of evil (from The Signs of Heaven by M.
Bischoff).
Specifically, we seek descriptions relating to fireball swarms or Tunguskalike impacts, associated with one or more cometary gods. Zodiacal
elements might be sought in the tales: descriptions of disaster coming out
of the constellation Taurus would be particularly significant. Finally, such
elements should be recorded in myths worldwide.
Certain patterns do indeed appear worldwide in these stories:
1. There was once a supreme sky god; this god often constructed
heaven and earth.
2. Later, the ‘world’ was peopled with giants in the sky.
3. There was a combat involving two major participants, god and
dragon, two dragons, or whatever. Often, the outcome of the battle was
fire and flood on the Earth below.
4. The major participants were frequently accompanied by hordes of
lesser creatures, such as the Annunaki in Babylonian myths.
5. The combat took place in the sky.
6. It was recurrent.
7. The combatants were celestial creatures, giants, noisy, chaotic,
winged, serpent-like and they spanned the skies. They might crash to
the ground in flames (one curious combatant is the roaring snake
which disappears into the ground). The lesser actors often resemble
the principals.
We consider that giants are comets, major splittings from the original
progenitor; the hordes are lesser debris; from time to time their orbits
bring them into real or apparent conflict with each other and with the real
world on the ground; while the world they build is the dust they shed, a
battery of luminous rings and orbital tracers. This is not of course to
exclude elements of the other propositions which may in part be later
additions constructed to give meaning to the tales when orbital evolution
was carrying the participants out of harm’s way or degassing was losing
them altogether: by the time the Greeks recorded the tales, their original
meaning may have been completely lost.
In The Cosmic Serpent, we pointed out that there is a striking resemblance
between the Tunguska impact, a medieval account of a stony meteorite
swarm which fell in what is now the USSR (as recorded by a local
chronicler) and the two battles of the gods as described by Hesiod in his
Theogony. The latter, written about 800 BC, describes tales of vastly
greater antiquity.
The medieval account, the oldest one of which we are aware, has been
quoted by the Russian astronomer Krinov: ‘there appeared over the town a
dark cloud, and it was dark as the night ... lightning kept flashing
ceaselessly ... Even the ground seemed to shake and sway continuously ...
clouds of fire arose and collided with one another, great heat coming from
the lightning and thunder’. In table 8 we have listed the main features of
the 1908 and 1296 impact events. There is very good agreement between
these independent accounts of the two impacts; this gives one confidence
that, should these features appear in mythical accounts, we are dealing
with a real impact event, whatever the poetic trappings and
misunderstandings of later interpreters.
Hesiod’s Theogony contains a story, probably derived from Babylon or
Sumer, that is typical of the combat myths. This is the tale of conflict in
heaven between Chronos, aided by the so-called Titans, against Zeus and
his five brothers and sisters. These were all children of Mother Earth and
Father Heaven. Although represented as living beings by the Greeks, they
were monsters of overwhelming strength. The description of the battle is
nothing if not ferocious, for example:
Then Zeus no longer held back his ferocity but now immediately his
mind was filled with fury and he showed forth all his strength; at the
same time, continually hurling his lightning, he came from heaven and
Olympus. Thick and fast, the thunderbolts, with thunder and lightning
(note the distinction!), flew from his stout hand and they made a holy
flame roll along, as they came in quick succession. The lifegiving earth
blazed and crashed all around, and all around immense woods
crackled loudly in the fire. The whole land. Ocean’s streams, and the
unfruitful sea seethed; the hot blast surrounded the earthborn Titans
and an immense flame reached the shining upper air. The gleaming
brilliance of the thunderbolt and lightning blinded their eyes, strong
though they were. An awful heat seized Chaos ...
and so on.
Later there was another attempt to defeat Zeus, when the Earth gave birth
to Typhon, a flaming, winged monster whose head reached the stars, who
had a hundred serpents’ heads in place of fingers, who was nothing but
vipers from the waist down, and whose eyes flashed fire. Typhon was
destroyed by Zeus’s thunderbolts and fell aflame to the ground. Typhon is
explicitly recognized as a comet in classical and early medieval times, being
described as such by the astrologer Lydus (AD 490-565), by Plutarch and
by Pliny 100 who, 800 years after Hesiod, describes a comet called Typhon
having ‘spiral-like, glowing red knots’. The spiral motif, as we have seen,
could only have been connected with a comet if it were an extraordinary
body.
The main features of these bodies are also listed in table 8; it is difficult to
avoid the conclusion that Hesiod is describing a very large, Tunguska-like
impact, large enough to flatten forests. Seasonal or eclipse interpretations
do seem a little inadequate, if not silly. But more than this, the impact is
clearly associated with its celestial source. The fiery, snake-like monsters in
the sky, each with its host of supporters, the recurrence of the cosmic war,
the impact motifs, all strongly suggest that our distant ancestors are telling
us, through Hesiod, about the very events we seek.
The celestial and cometary imagery are seen quite clearly in other classical
authors, as for example in the Dionysiaka of Nonnos, written around AD
500. According to Nonnos, 101 the battle began when Zeus hid his celestial
weapons in a grotto and they were stolen by Typhoeus. In the course of
battle the monster ‘lashes the back of the hail-spewing Goat’ (sic), disturbs
the constellations and devastates the earth, and ‘uproots trees and forests
and rolls them along in front of him’. After the first battle:
night came upon the earth and Helios guided the storm-tossed chariot
into the undamaged Atlantic Gates. All the gods wandered fleetingly
along the banks of the Nile ... Only Zeus still lingered in the high
constellation of the Bull. As if driven by the storm, countless leaping
stars flashed through the upper atmosphere and, all around, lightning
flashes cut the heavens. A comet spread its disheveled light.
But then, in the morning, Typhoeus ‘rose in the shape of a human,
encircled the earth with his arms that were a thousand snakes and from his
countless heads resounded the howling of wolves, the roaring of lions’ etc.
After a long and terrible struggle, Zeus’s celestial thunderbolts’ smash the
crown of the speckled dragon’s head, the coiled comet scatters the hair on
the head of Typhoneus ... and the giant ... now finally plunges to Earth’. The
account given by Nonnos, then, although written over a millennium later
than Hesiod, contains many elements not in the earlier authors. Certainly,
as before, the event is firmly placed in the heavens. But now we have an
explicit description of:
1. a fireball swarm, associated with
2. an impact event,
3. emerging from the constellation Taurus, and
4. associated with a large ‘coiled’ comet.
The statement that the celestial gods wandered fleetingly along the banks
of the Nile (only Zeus lingering in the Bull) is of course incomprehensible
in terms of terrestrial imagery. However as we have seen the ancient rivers
were often cosmic, and the Egyptians connected the Nile and the sky in a
very specific way. In this system, discovered early this century by Georges
Daressy, the Egyptians mapped the Nile on to the zodiac. Nonnos, it
appears, is describing the celestial Nile, thus:
5. the gods were wandering along the zodiac.
Zeus, the hurler of the thunderbolts, lingered in the constellation of the
Bull: one could hardly expect a more explicit description of a fireball swarm
emerging from Taurus! A Taurius connection seems to be unique to the
catastrophist hypothesis we are proposing (for example it has no eclipse
significance), and we shall therefore examine it in more detail.
The orbit of Encke’s Comet and its associated material evolves slowly
because of the cumulative gravitational disturbances of Jupiter and Saturn.
As a result of this precession, the radiant of the Taurid meteors drifts
slowly over the millennia, eastwards along the zodiac. Up to two or three
thousand years ago the radiant of the southern Taurids was straddling the
constellations of Taurus and Aries and Ram; prior to that the meteors were
emerging from the Ram. Since we are in almost complete ignorance of the
detailed structure of the complex of debris, we can hardly be more precise
than say that myths of catastrophe, if based on the giant comet debris,
should be based on the Taurid-Arietid region of sky.
The Taured-Arietid connection is to be found worldwide in the tales of
catastrophe, as expected if a universal phenomenon was being observed.
For example it is found, in much diluted form, in the Bible (Judges 15):
And he found a new jawbone of an ass, and put forth his hand and
took it, and slew a thousand men therewith. And Samson said, with
the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps, with the jaw of an ass have I
slain a thousand men ... And he was sore athirst, and called on the
Lord, and said. Thou hast given this great deliverance into the hand of
thy servant: and how shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the
uncircumcised? But God clave an hollow place that was in the jaw, and
there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit came
again, and he revived ... And he judged Israel in the days of the
Philistines twenty years.
The jawbone of the ass is in the sky: as pointed out by de Santillana and
von Dechend, it was the name given by the Babylonians to the Hyades, a
bright jawbone-shaped cluster of stars in the constellation Taurus (modern
Amazonian Indians call it the jawbone of the ox). In the Babylonian
creation epic, older than the sources discussed here, Marduk used the
Hyades as weapon against the celestial monsters. The Samson story, it
seems, is a pale survival, the chaos emerging from Taurus reduced to a
bizarre fight on earth, the flood connection (p. 181) reduced to a quenching
of thirst. The association of the celestial conflict with the Taurus
constellation is therefore very old.
In Chinese myth, the world was created by the cosmic serpent NuKua. No
sooner was this idyllic world created than the demon king Kung Kung ‘rose
at the head of a multitude of dragons from the dark waters of the
primordial abyss that encircled earth’. After a chaotic battle in which earth
and heaven were upset, Kung Kung was defeated and abdicated in favour of
his son. His son, Yu Shih, was at times benevolent, at times very
destructive; when he appeared on earth with scales of yellow armour and a
blue straw hat, accompanied by a one-legged bird, he brought rain; and his
throne was in the Hyades. Records show that sacrifices were made to these
deities at least as far back as 1100 BC.
In Celtic myth, the monster Gargantua was born from his mother’s mouth
in the form of the long eel. In this form he corresponds to another Celtic
monster called the Tarasque. This latter creature is still celebrated in
Tarascon, in the French Pyrenees, in two festivals, according to the
anthropologist Huxley, 102 ‘one a sober Church festival ... the other a
boisterous occasion when young men splash the girls with water and the
monster is wheeled about the town, clashing his toothy jaws at the
spectators while his great eyes stare lugubriously’. Variants of this festival
survive to the present day throughout the Celtic world. Its significance here
is not just the water connection which appears again here: at the same
place, but much earlier, Heracles defeated a monster called Tauriscus or
Tarusco. In Celtic myth, then, the monster which Heracleds fought was a
bull. The legend is recorded by the geographer Strabo in the century before
Christ but is presumably much older again. The same basic story of
celestial catastrophe, then, seems to have been told worldwide, and is at
least as old as the second millennium BC.
Grotesque though the birth of Gargantua is, it is paralleled by that of the
cosmic serpent Ptah, creator of the earth, who emerged from the mouth of
the remote primal Egyptian deity Amen-Khnum. The latter is depicted as a
ram-god, and if these tales have any meaning at all, it is at least possible
that an earlier emergence of material from the constellation Aries (the
Ram) is being described. Zeus is often connected with a ram by the Greek
storytellers, as in the combat story where Zeus, pursued by Typhon to the
Nile, took the guise of a ram.
It is not to be supposed that the classical authors understood the ultimate
origin of the material they were handling. This can be seen, for example, in
the decline of Zeus into a mere weather god. Hesiod attempted to give a
volcanic flavor to Typhon by having him plunge to Earth under Mount
Etna, but the older versions, we know from the oriental sources, have
neither weather nor volcanic connections. It is all the more satisfactory,
then, that every element one might expect from the astronomical
framework has survived the preconceptions of the classical storytellers.
Our distant ancestors, it seems, have been telling us in simple language
that celestial catastrophe has struck, probably more than once, but the
message has been lost through the ravages of time.
Whatever happened was probably experienced over a wide area. Hesiod
and Nonnos are far from being original or even principal sources of myth.
The Greeks united much local myth which had developed in local
communities, but we have seen that the combat myth itself is very much
older than Hesiod and occurs over much of the Old World, from
Scandinavia to India and China. The conflict between the dragon pair may
also be traced back in time to Babylonian myth (Tiamat v Apsu and then
Marduk); Indian (Indra v Vitra and then Danu); and so on.
Elements of the theme appear in the Bible in the miraculous destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah and the surrounding plain by the raining down of
fire from heaven. The story may also be recognized in the Book of
Revelation as the battle between Michael and Satan ‘the dragon, the
primeval serpent’. These terrestrial catastrophe of cosmic origin are
discussed in The Cosmic Serpent and are only mentioned in passing here
(see table 9).
The recurrence of the combat in these stories is interesting: the villains
have to be disposed of not once but twice. This could possibly refer to a
twin encounter with debris. In figure 9 are shown the nodes of the orbit of
Encke’s Comet, that is, the two intersections of the comet orbit with the
ecliptic plane. Extremely close encounters with the comet are only possible
when the nodes intersect the Earth’s orbit. For Encke’s Comet these
intersections occurred around 200 BC and 600 BC, and again around 3900
BC and 3700 BC. As we have seen, if Encke’s Comet was active at any of
these dates, the intersection would produce the most spectacular celestial
phenomena. However, even between nodal intersections fierce annual
meteor storms are expected, with peaks in activity recurring at intervals of
about fifty years. The dates should not be taken too literally since the
encounters may have taken place, not with Encke’s Comet, but with a larger
progenitor of which Encke is a fragment.
The point to note is that the encounter epochs occur in pairs, separated by
a few centuries, that is, within the lifetime of these orally transmitted tales.
The persistence of these stories is as remarkable as their universality:
Nonnos is AD 500, Hesiod before 700 BC and the Marduk-Tiamat conflict
goes back perhaps to 1500 BC or even earlier. They are in fact recognizably
the same basic story. Either the astronomical phenomena recurred over
long periods or the verbal transmission of the information was sufficiently
robust that the same basic story remained recognizable over timescales of
order a millennium. Clearly, the stories were of fundamental importance.
Taken together, they amount to a description of perhaps two principal
comets in the sky, evidently associated with fireballs, storms and recurring
impacts, some of which seem to have been in the Tunguska class.
Other ancient myth systems, although less well known in the western world
than the Greek tales, seem to carry similar celestial messages in different
poetical clothing. This can be seen for example in Indian mythology, which
is old and complex and formed from a mingling of cultures. Around 2000
BC Aryan-speaking tribes came over the northwest frontier of India from
the region of Iran, and settled in the Punjab. The gods they brought with
them were already very old and widely disturbed, probably going back to
the Stone Age. Dealing as we are with gods over four thousand years old we
should expect the earliest myths relating to that distant period to include
tales of the short-period comets and their celestial debris. The period from
these first settlements in the Punjab until about 800-700 BC is referred to
as the Vedic Age, during which the Vedas, hymns to the deities, were
composed. Other cosmologies, the Hindu, Buddhist and Jain, then arose,
but it is especially to the ancient Vedas, with their chants, songs and epic
tales, that we should look for evidence of an active sky.
There is evidence in the texts for the existence of gods even older than the
Vedic period. 103 These were the Adityas or ‘celestials’ and included DyausPitar representing the primeval heavens. However worship of these
celestials was already decaying in the earliest Vedic period, and in the later
Vedic texts Indra boasts that he has dethroned Varuna, an early great rival
of Indra who represents in some way the orderliness of heaven, the regular
movement of sun, stars and so on. We therefore have an early orderversus-chaos theme. Indra, the principal Aryan (now called IndoEuropean) deity was a hammer god like Thor of northern Europe, Zeus of
southern Europe, Ptah of Egypt, P’an Ku of China and Finn-mac-Coul of
Scotland. Indra fought the dragon Vritra in a tale very similar to the
Grecian Zeus-Typhon conflict, one difference being that, whereas Typhon
was buried under Mount Etna in accordance with poetic preconceptions,
Vritra was ‘earned to the darksome deeps of Ocean’. Various groups of
demons existed, similar to the gods and often associated with them, and
indeed gods and demons changed places over the Vedic period. It is not
clear whether the demon groups were different celestial phenomena or
different tribal concepts of the same one.
There were the Nagas, serpents from the waist down, whose king Shesha is
identical to Typhon. There were the ‘ugly Vartikas of dreadful sight, having
one wing, one eye and one leg’. These were used in divination: when they
‘vomit blood, facing the sun’ this was regarded as an evil omen. It is
difficult to see how non-existent objects, mere poetic fancies, could be used
as omens, and it seems more likely that the Vartikas were real objects,
cometary in nature, the tails streaming away from the Sun and their nuclei
facing it. Imagery consistent with the astronomical expectations is seen
again, for example, in the Titan-like Daityas, who resided in a moving city
Hiranyapura: ‘sometimes it sinks below the sea, or under earth; at other
times it soars across the heavens like the sun’. The chief deities, Indra and
Varuna, have similar celestial cities, idyllic places like Plato’s Atlantis
before the fall, or the Golden Age, or Nu Kua’s world before the demons
came. One might seek to dismiss these sky-crossing cities as the products
of lurid imaginations, just as Victorians dismissed myth as the fancies of
primitive minds. But again, if myth is a carrier of cosmic information, they
are more consistently understood as real things in the sky.
The slow movement of the equinoxes through the constellations, and the
long evolution of the cometary gods, were the two grand phenomena of the
ancient skies. The world ages were each ended, it is claimed, by the passage
of the equinoxes from one constellation to another. Whether the precession
of the equinoxes was in fact known in remote antiquity is a debatable
question: between noticing the slow shift of the rising point of a star
against an old tree, and inferring a polar wobble, there is a large theoretical
leap. But if we assume with de Santillana and von Dechend that some
village Einstein took that leap, why should the ancients have described the
world ages as ending in catastrophe? Should not the traditions of cosmic
swarm be separate from those of equinoctial passage?
The sky has thrown up an interesting coincidence here. The radiants of the
Taurids, that is the point on the celestial sphere from which the fireballs
seem to come, also moves slowly across the sky, in the opposite direction to
the equinox and at a slower rate. The start of the mythic Bronze Age saw
the spring equinox passing from Taurus into Aries around 2500 BC, but for
the next millennium it also saw the Taurid stream gradually shifting from
Aries into Taurus. The constellations themselves for the most part were
probably only created around 2600 BC. The Taurids therefore came from
out of the spring equinox around the time of the constellation markers. It
would be natural, at that time, to link the two great phenomena, the marker
ending the world age and the one bringing catastrophe. There is scope here
for further study.
The unraveling of the ancient picture will indeed continue to be a complex
business, to be approached warily. The point to be made, of course, is that
we cannot, as so many mythologists have done (see note 89), try to
understand these ancient sky stories while ignoring the state of the sky as it
actually was (see table 10). In particular, it is difficult to avoid the signals of
catastrophe which were attached to the Taurus and Aries constellations in
the remote past.
A comprehensible analysis of the other ancient astronomical legacies, in
particular the calendar and alignments, will likewise be a long and complex
business, and is not attempted here. Some indication of the way such an
analysis might develop can be given, however, by the following example. At
present the Taurid meteors appear at night in middle and late November.
Allowing for their slow orbital evolution, and for the precession of the
equinoxes, one finds that going back in time they appeared about one week
earlier per millennium, assuming that they derived mainly form Encke’s
Comet. In 1000 BC for instance, they appeared in late October/early
November, the radiant reaching the meridian at midnight. Again, no great
precision can be given since the structure of the Taurid stream is almost
unknown. Nevertheless the annual appearance of the meteor stream
blazing forth from the sky would make an unmistakable annual event, and
one might seek evidence of an annual rite at this date, or even a calendar
marker, with fireball overtones.
The natural dividing points of the year would of course be the summer and
winter solstices, with the spring and autumn equinoxes midway between
them, and there is indeed an abundance of festivals to celebrate these
markers. There is also evidence of megalithic alignment towards points on
the horizon indicating that a solar calendar was used in neolithic Europe.
Curiously, however, later European tribes seem to have divided their year
quite differently, this in spite of the fact that, at more northern latitudes,
the contrast between summer and winter is more striking than say at
Mediterranean latitudes. Thus the Celts who arrived in Britain from central
Europe between 1000-800 BC began their new year with the Sambain. This
was one of the four quarters days with which the Celtic immigrants divided
up their year (they are still celebrated in Celtic hinterlands such as the
Scottish Borders). It fell on 1 November, the date of the Taurids around
1000 BC, was celebrated as a fire festival, and was known as a time when
the gods drew near to the earth and the souls of the dead were abroad.
Every fire was extinguished until the Pleiades, a conspicuous little star
cluster in Taurus, had passed the meridian, at which point new fires were
lit and carried by runners to every village. The festival survives as
Hallowe’en (see chapter 2) although the bonfires were later transferred to
5, November.
It has been claimed that this calendar has a pastoral basis, marking off the
beginning of lambing, the abundance of grass, the exchanging of sheep and
cattle at fairs and the slaughter of livestock before winter. Unfortunately for
this point of view, as pointed out by Whitlock, 104 pastoral economies came
before agricultural ones, whereas the ‘pastoral’ calendar of the Celts, if such
it was, seems to have come after the agricultural calendar. In discussing
these ancient calendars, Whitlock also remarks: ‘One other small fact
slightly worries the author, who was born and bred to agriculture. No
farmer that he has ever met has needed a calendar to tell him when to sow
and when to reap. Farmers know instinctively and by observation. Why
then should so much importance be attached to dates and calendars? Why
indeed, unless the calendar was ritualistic and concerned with the rich
variety of Taurid phenomena?
The Chinese still celebrate a Feast of the Dead in November by lighting
bonfires and sailing paper boats carrying lighted candles; and at this time
in China too, the dead cross the sea to their eternal abode; in Japan, the
Feast of Lanterns is celebrated in October and November; and so on. The
returning of the souls of the dead to their homes is very like the Platonic
conception of souls carried heaven-wards by meteors, and it seems very
unlikely that festivals so similar, celebrated worldwide at the same time of
year, should have arisen by coincidence. And yet the October/November
period has no particular seasonal significance. The festival is as universal,
and as old, as the swastika and the tales of celestial catastrophe. If the
onset of the Taurid meteor shower was the signal for the start of the New
Year, it must have been impressive indeed.
There were two Aztec calendars, a ritualistic one of 260 days and a solar
calendar. The origin of the former has never been explained. The least
common multiple of 260 and 365 days is 18,980 days or 52 years, and it
may be significant too that the 52-year cycle which terminated the Aztec
calendars ended in November. 105 At this time there was a festival lasting
for 12 days. These acted as 12 leap-days, keeping the calendar adjusted to
the seasons. On the midnight of the last day, when the brightest star in
Taurus passed overhead (Aldebaran, known to the Aztecs as the star of the
fire-making), there was a human sacrifice. All fires were extinguished and
then re-lit by torches carrying sacred fire from the temples: the parallel
with the Celtic and Asiatic customs is extraordinary. The sacrifices, and
other aspects of these festivals, had to do with propitiation and fear, and it
seems clear that the source of this fear was the cataract of fire. The
alternative is to suppose that these midnight celebrations took place with
the Taurids raining overhead unnoticed by priests and faithful alike!
For that matter, certain aspects of Quetzalcoatl, the feathered serpent who
represented planet Venus, have a distinctly cometary flavor (plate 24): this
is particularly true of its representations in the remote pre-Toltec period.
Tales relating to Encke’s Comet, like Venus a brilliant morning and evening
object, were probably, in the New World as in the Old, eventually
transferred to the planet.
The preoccupation with the calendar and cycles of time which characterizes
Old World societies, the fear of celestial gods which might bring the world
to an end if not propitiated, the meticulous observation of the sky, the
dominance of theocracy and astronomer-priests, all have their analogies in
the ancient civilizations of the west, and all have their internal ‘sociological’
explanations. In our view, however, the pace was ultimately forced by an
external, astronomical trigger.
Of course, one would like to have explicit astronomical records. These are
sparse in the extreme. Old Babylonian astronomy of the second millennium
BC has left us one astrological and one astronomical text. The astronomical
text is the Venus Tablets of Ammizaduga. This is apparently a record of
positions of the planet Venus, described as the ‘Bright Queen of the Sky’.
The Babylonian Venus was therefore the planet as long ago as 1600-1700
BC. This need not be a difficulty for a purely cometary hypothesis since
Innana, ‘crowned with great horns’, would be a brilliant morning and
evening star both in her planetary aspect as Venus and in her divine aspect
as the giant comet (cf. plate 9 (b)): evidence for such duality exists in the
dual naming of planets by the Babylonians (table 4).
Plate 24. Crowned with great horns? (cf. plate 9(b)); photo by
permission of the Museum fur Volkerkunde, Berlin.) The feathered
serpent Quetzalcoatl on a pre-Toltec stele. The deity symbolizes Venus,
as does the disc below. However this depiction, and others, has an
obvious cometary flavor, as do catastrophist traditions associated with
the god (in some accounts Quetzalcoatl would rain fire from heaven,
and throw stones which flattened forests). This is consistent with
astronomical evidence that, in early historical times (say before 700
BC), Venus would have been outclassed as a spectacular object by the
active comets of the Taurid swarm. It may therefore be that in such
representations and tales a memory is preserved of the deity as
originally a bright periodic comet of an earlier period.
For the more recent Assyrian period, around 1400-100 BC, the only
significant texts are star lists, and the so-called astrolabes. These latter
were very common and widely distributed, texts from Assur, Nineveh, Uruk
and Babylon having been found, covering almost a thousand-year period.
They consist of 36 stars, 3 to a month, covering the 12 months of the year.
Evidently, they were calendars, the predawn risings of the stars marking
out the course of the year. Oddly, the ‘planets’ Jupiter, Mars, Mercury and
so on are included amongst the star lists. But as calendar markers the
planets are useless since they wander along the zodiac and have different
positions from one year to the next. Scholarly discussion of this problem is
confined to the statement that ‘This is very curious, for planets do not
appear in a fixed month of the year’. Intense annual meteor streams,
recognizably associated with conspicuous comets, would however be
natural calendar markers. Associated with the star lists are texts, and in
them one reads ‘when the stars of Enlil have disappeared, the great, faint
star which bisects the heavens and stands, is Marduk: he (the god) changes
his position and wanders over the heavens’; or alternatively, ‘The red star
which, when the stars of the night are finished, bisects the heavens and
stand there whence the south wind comes, this star is the god Marduk’ (our
italics). As descriptions of the planet Jupiter, these text appear less than
satisfactory, but as descriptions of a great comet in zodiac with a huge but
faint red tail bisecting the sky and associated with a fixed meteor stream
(Enlil) from the south, they seem to be more readily understandable. If
further textual analysis should confirm these suspicions, one will have a
direct identification of Babylonian gods with specific short-period comets
most of which, however, will now be degassed and invisible.
So far, the discussion has related only to the last few thousand years, the
period of recorded history. The Earth, however, is almost a million times
older than this. The story of catastrophe from the sky, occurring within the
human timescales, must therefore take place in a much larger context. In
looking at this larger picture, at the great mass extinctions and geological
processes of the past, one may therefore get a better insight into the
microcosm which is human history of the last 5,000 years. And in fact, an
understanding of the larger picture turns out to be essential for a realistic
assessment of future shocks. Let us therefore see to what extent the
labyrinth of history, and the bull of heaven, can be united into a coherent
model by the thread of science.