
III — THE THREAD OF
SCIENCE
14 — Galactic Imprint
The Earth is a small planet but a highly active one, much more so
than say the Moon, Mercury or Mars. The continents of Earth drift
and collide, riding on underlying currents of slow-moving, semimolten rock below the crust. The viscosity of the material below the
crust is high, a billion times that of asphalt say, and it will only move
in response to large forces applied steadily for thousands of years.
The mobility of the Earth’s crust extends to the sea floor: the ocean
bed wells up and spreads outwards from long central ridges, before
sliding under the continents at the ocean margins. Thus the ocean
basins are very young, only a few percent of the ages of the
continents. All these motions are very slow, typically an inch a year;
human hair grows faster.
A picture has emerged, then, of a terrestrial crust which is not static,
but which is made up of a few continental plates drifting over the
Earth’s surface. Although the pattern of movement of continents
over the globe has really only been worked out for the past 400
million years, less then 10 per cent of the age of the Earth, it appears
that in the central regions on North America can be detected the
fused remnants of earlier continents and island arcs going back at
least two billion years. About 400 million years ago there was, in
effect, a single large land mass around the south pole. The mass
broke up into a few fragments which, about 200 million years ago,
began to move slowly apart. A map of the Earth of, say, 60 million
years ago is quite recognizable although, for instance, the Atlantic
Ocean was then much narrower. Much of geological history can be
understood in terms of the continual drifting and colliding of the
giant continental rafts. It is known, for example, that the great
mountain-building episodes in Earth history have taken place along
the boundaries where the continental plates have been pushed up at
the ocean margins, generating earthquakes as they rise and fold,
while the sea floor has been subducted back down into the mantle
whence it came. The enormous pressure and heat generated at the
base of the rising mountains creates molten granite which, forced up
along with basalt from the deeper mantle, reaches the surface as lava
and volcanic ash. The theory of continental drift was neglected long
after its introduction to a skeptical scientific community, and yet (in
its modern guise of plate tectonics) it now provides a framework
within which many geological processes — mountain building,
earthquakes, volcanism and so on — can be understood. If this were
the whole story, there would be no need to look to the heavens for an
explanation of events on or under the ground: the Earth can do it all
by itself. This has been the traditional view of many geologists,
palaeontologists and other Earth scientists.
And yet, within the last few years, it has begun to look as if there is a
problem with a purely Earth-centred viewpoint. The problem arises
because, if processes on Earth, such as mountain building, were
driven only by the random collisions of giant continental rafts, there
would be no pattern to them. It seems that this is not so; plate
tectonic events recur with some degree of regularity: there are times
when the Earth is active and times when it is not. And it turns out
that, when we look at the timescales associated with these patterns of
activity, a very significant clue emerges.
That there might be some regularity in Earth processes has been
suspected for a long time. Over fifty years ago the geologists Arthur
Holmes 106 thought that the level of the seas rose and fell in 30-
million year cycles (see figure 11). The changes involved are large,
typically 100 metres or more. Holmes also thought that these
variations occurred, somehow, in phase with worldwide outbursts of
volcanic activity and the like. Holmes went further: superimposed on
this cycle, he thought, were even larger events — the creation of great
mountain ranges — taking place at about 200-million-year intervals.
Such ideas, invoked before the modern understanding of plate
tectonics and before rock ages could be accurately dated with
radiometric techniques, could be no more than suggestive. In fact,
they were largely overlooked in the heat of the plate tectonic
revolution. But the ideas of these early workers, so long ignored, bear
a remarkable resemblance to new results which are now emerging
from researches using improved rock dating methods and the
increasing sophistication of geological science. 107
Figure 11. Sea level cycles of 30 and 250 million years, claimed
by Arthur Holmes in 1927 and correlated by him with periodic
geological disturbances (line drawing published by Benn,
London). Although this diagram is qualitative and was drawn
long before plate-tectonic theory, it anticipates much recent,
quantitative research on geological cycles.
In 1968, partly from a study of ocean temperatures as revealed by
fossil shells, the geologist Dorman suggested that there might be a
30-million-year world temperature cycle (see figure 12). And in 1970,
the geologists Hatfield and Camp, from Toledo, argued that
catastrophic mass extinctions of life took place at regular intervals.
They saw, in the record, seven intense mass extinctions, two of which
(65 and 225 million years ago) were exceptionally ferocious. They
thought that, overall, mass extinctions happened every 80 or 90
million years, with an exceptionally catastrophic one every 225 to
275 million years ago.
Figure 12. A 30-million-year cycle in global temperature,
claimed by Dorman in 1968 using the proportion of ‘heavy
carbon’ in fossil shells as a thermometer. Little weight should be
given to the ‘cycles’ on the left due to the sparseness of the data
on which they were based.
They thought (correctly) that the Sun completes an orbit round the
Galaxy once every 200 to 280 million years, and (wrongly) that the
Sun oscillates out of the plane of the Galaxy in a period of 80 to 90
million years. Putting these data together they deduced that the
Sun’s orbit around the Galaxy must somehow be causing mass
extinctions of life on Earth.
In the following year, the Scottish geologist Maclntyre 108 reported
an extensive study of the ages of a particular type of rock, known as
carbonatite, in Canada. The significance of carbonatite is that it is
extruded from the mantle of the Earth during times of high volcanic
activity; it therefore acts as a marker for disturbances of the deep
interior of the Earth. Any regularity in the production is best found
on an ancient stable region such as the Canadian Shield. MacIntyre
found the remarkable result shown in figure 13. On this evidence
Earth disturbances seem to have occurred, not at random, but at
intervals of roughly 230 million years over the last 1,800 million
years at least.
Figure 13. A 230-million-year cycle in the production of
carbonatic claimed by the geologist MacIntyre. Carbonatite is
extruded in lava outpourings and is a measure of the degree of
disturbances of the Earth’s outer regions due to the movements
of continental plates. This ‘grand cycle’ is about the length of a
galactic year.
There is no significant difference between 230 and 250 million years
in the present context — even now geological timescales beyond
about 200 million years are not accurate to more than, say, 10
percent. In effect, MacIntyre’s modem study supports the much
older and cruder work of Holmes. No internal process is known
which could generate convulsions of the Earth at such intervals.
In fact 230 million years is about the time it takes the Sun to orbit
once around the centre of the Galaxy. This fact did not go unnoticed
by MacIntyre. However he had no suggestion to make as to how
something as remote as the Sun’s galactic orbit might generate
massive outpourings of lava from the interior of the Earth.
Others noted the Holmes timescales in other terrestrial events. In
1973 the geologists Steiner and Grillmair noted that ice ages came
and went on the Earth with periods corresponding to the galactic
year (say 250 million years) and the Sun’s up and down motion
through the flat disc of the Galaxy (say 30 million years). Many
factors, they considered, must go into the making of an ice age. In
order of importance, they listed the distance of the Sun from the
centre of Galaxy, the motion of the Sun out of the plane of the Milky
Way, the geometry of the Earth’s orbit around the Sun, the position
of continents and oceans over the globe, altitude of mountains and
plateau, and unknown causes. In 1977, MacIntyre noted that there
had probably been five worldwide geological events over the past 130
million years which were probably caused by sudden changes in the
motions of the continental plates. This gives a mean interval between
these events of 26 million years, very like the shorter cycle which
Holmes thought he had detected. Also in 1977, the American
geologists Fischer and Arthur noted that changes in sea level, and
mass extinctions of ocean life, seemed to be taking place at 30
million year intervals. Vogt noted that the volcanic activity on Earth
was not sporadic but that worldwide outbursts occurred at distinct
epoch; he, however, thought that the timescale involved was about
50 rather than 30 million years. But still the mystery remained: if the
Galaxy was having such a profound effect on the Earth, how?
The first hint (from the geological point of view) at the nature of the
cosmic forces involved was published by Seyfert and Sirkin 109 in
1979 (see table 11). These geologists found what appeal ed to be a
direct connection between terrestrial cycles and celestial encounters
of a violent kind. Listing the ages of the known impact craters on
Earth, they found that these seemed to be bunched, as if impacts
were occurring at about 26-million-year intervals. They also found
that these bursts seemed to coincide with widespread geological
upsets (Holmes again!), caused by sudden movements of the
continental plates. The clear implication was the brief but violent
bombardments of the Earth were somehow causing terrestrial
convulsions. These convulsions are not small affairs: one observes
for example a particularly sharp bend in the Hawaii-Emperor chain
of Pacific volcanoes, including Hawaii, which occurred 42 million
years ago during one of the bombardment episodes. These volcanoes,
most of which are submarine, are formed by the drifting of the
Pacific plate over a hotspot located underneath the crust of the
Earth. The plate has been sharply dislocated and, because they
interlock like the pieces of a jigsaw, the entire surface of the Earth
must have been affected.
After many years of neglect, these claims of periodicity are now being
rediscovered, using new fossil and other data and sophisticated
statistical techniques (table 12). In 1984 Raup and Sepkoski found
what appeared to be a 26 million year cycle of mass extinctions in the
marine microfossil record, as if the ocean planktonic species were
liable to become extinct en masse at these intervals. Since then the
subject has been controversial though claims for a similar periodicity
were made for both the cratering and volcanic records. Some of these
data are shown in figure 14. Mathematical techniques exist for
picking out any periodic signals which may be hidden away in noisy
data and we have applied one such technique to the cratering and
volcanic information. There does indeed seem to be a periodicity in
the terrestrial record. The period is not, however, 30 million years, as
frequently claimed, but 15 million!
A possible reason for this discrepancy becomes apparent when we
look at the history of the Earth’s magnetic field. The strength and
direction of this field at any given epoch in the past can sometimes
be found, frozen in rock which solidified at the epoch in question. In
this way it has been discovered that quite frequently in geological
history, the magnetic field of the Earth reverses, north and south
magnetic poles interchanging rapidly, within the space of a thousand
years of so. The history of the Earth seems to be episodic, long
periods of stability when no reversals occur interspersing with
episodes of 50-100 million years duration when the magnetic poles
flip over at the rate of perhaps five or ten times in a million years. In
figure 15 is shown the rate at which the geomagnetic field has been
changing over the last 200 million years. From this we can see that,
beginning 80 million years back, field reversals have been taking
place at an ever-increasing rate. This rate, however, has not been
steady: the reversals tend to occur in surges. And in this figure, we
see that these surges are periodic, happening every 15 million years
or so, the most recent episode having peaked only a few million years
in the past. 110
Figure 14. Rate of extinction of families over the last 250 million
years, after Raup and Sepkoski (permission D.M. Raup). The
arrows represent a 26-million-year cycle. There is no indication
of an ‘interpulse’ between the large peaks but the data may not
be at a level where they can be detected. There have not been
enough 10-km bolides over the period in question to produce
these extinctions, and if due to external forcing, a more
continuous interaction between Earth and sky is implied: both
the prolonged climatic and prompt impact effects of cometary
debris, with galactic modulation, appear to be adequate.
The reversal pattern, however, is not that of a uniform cycle. Rather,
it seems to show weak and strong surges alternating, and another
way of describing the record might be to say that there is a strong 30-
million-year cycle with a weaker interpulse. This, probably, is why
the cycle length detected in the earlier records was 30 million years:
as the quality of the data deteriorates, so it rapidly becomes very
difficult to detect even the major cycle, and a true 15-million-year
weak-strong-weak cycle is misread as one of double the period. The
15 million-year cycle had in fact been thrown up by the mathematical
techniques used by several workers examining geological data of
high quality, but most of these workers had chosen to ignore the
result because it did not fit theoretical preconceptions then in vogue
favouring a 30-million-year cycle.
Figure 15. Frequency with which the north and south magnetic
poles of the Earth interchange, after K.M. Creer and P.C. Pal. in
this more nearly complete geological record a variable 15/30-
million-year cycle is clearly seen superimposed on longer-term
trends.
The question arises whether a pattern of this character could
somehow be imposed as the Sun orbits around the Galaxy, and the
answer is in the affirmative. The Galaxy affects the solar
environment in part through tides. As we saw in chapter 9, these
tides are negligible on the surface of the Earth or within the
planetary system, but they do disturb the orbits of long-period
comets, which are only just gravitationally bound to the Sun. The
magnitude of the tides will vary with the disposition and mass of
galactic material around the Sun. and the flux of comets into the
planetary system will vary accordingly. Now it is true that the Sun
moves around the Galaxy in a porpoise-like fashion, oscillating up
and down through the galactic plane as it orbits the centre. This is
likely to yield a 30-million-year pattern of tidal stresses and comet
inflow, as galactic material is concentrated towards the plane.
However the Sun has also, for the past 100 million years or so, been
immersed in a spiral arm known as the Orion arm. It turns out that
spiral arms themselves contain substantial amounts of material,
enough to create their own tides. Above and below a spiral arm, this
tide acts in the opposite direction to that of the galactic disc material.
The disc and arm tides cancel each other when the Sun is about half
way to the highest point of its orbit, with the result that the comet
flux is temporarily halted. The overall result is a basic cycle of 15
rather then 30 million years, with a strong surge when the Sun is
near the plane, and a weaker one when the Sun is around the high
point of its orbit. The time taken for the Sun to cross a spiral arm is
typically 50-100 million years, and these cycles will come and go,
episodically, on such timescales.
The origin of the magnetic field of the Earth is not well understood,
but it is agreed to be due, in some way, to movements in the fluid
core of the Earth. The diameter of this core is about half that of the
Earth; it probably encloses an inner, solid core at the very centre.
The fluid material of the core, probably a mixture of molten iron and
nickel, flows at a rate of about 2 millimetres a minute: a good deal
faster than human hair grows. It is likely that the magnetic field at
the surface of the Earth is created in some way by patterns in the
movement of the molten metal; these patterns must therefore be
affected in some way by the Galaxy, presumably through the
intermediary of cometary interactions.
Although a reasonably complete understanding of the Earth’s
magnetic field has not yet been arrived at, its intermittent character
is unmistakable. This, coupled with the piecemeal nature of the
terrestrial activity, seems to bear out what has occasionally been
suspected in the past from the stratified appearance of the geological
record, namely the possibility that evolution, even on the largest
scales, is not a steady continuous process. Rather, we observe a
sequence of unitary events of differing intensity, the intervals
between which are ostensibly random though also periodic. As we
have already noted, this combination of irregularity and periodicity,
with bunching in the record corresponding probably to several
galactic cycles over the range 15-250 million years, implies events
that are produced in surges which may be attributed to variations in
the Solar System environment as the Sun makes its journey through
the Galaxy. But the most significant factor so far as evolution is
concerned may now be understood as owing more to the effects of
recent unitary events than it does to any smooth underlying
Darwinian process. Earth history is then in principle a sequence of
equilibrium states (involving relatively little evolution) separated by
moments of crisis brought on by the arrival in circumterrestrial
space of new giant comets. In other words, we deal with a pattern of
‘punctuated equilibrium’ and a fundamentally catastrophic Earth
history.
Such findings do not undermine the popular Darwinian view of
evolution but they certainly modify it to a substantial degree. Thus,
according to Darwinian theory, we have to imagine some continuous
process operating on living species which is capable of introducing
small random variations and some other barely perceptible process
which allows preferred selections to be made amongst these
variations. Such selection, it is supposed, results in that systematic
long-term departure from the status quo which we recognize as
evolution. The mutation of genes has been identified as the neutral
random process whilst the directed process, natural selection socalled, apparently works so as to maximize a species’ long-term
chance of survival in a given environment — hence, ‘survival of the
fittest’. The implication is that living or active matter has the capacity
to continuously adapt to the environment and reach a state of
equilibrium or perfect balance. However, the fossil record is not
really like this at all. Whole families, orders or classes suddenly
vanish from time to time, each event followed by a period of recovery
during which a reduced or modified gene pool, taking species
together, is apparently seeking once again to reassert itself over a
hostile environment. According to this evidence, evolution may be
Darwinian for short spells but the true course of evolution is
dominated by the destruction of species during the moments of
crisis. Although there remains a sense in which we observe survival
of the fittest, life is also subject to an equally significant principle,
survival of the luckiest. In recent years therefore, the theory of
evolution has been escaping from its Victorian mould.
At the molecular level, the biological process of adaptation is now
known to depend on the capacity for self-replication, a property that
active or living matter seems to hold in common with inert matter.
Inorganic matter for example replicates itself in the form of crystals,
whilst organic matter replicates itself in the form of complex
structures like DNA. In one case, the outcome is relatively static and
robust for a given environment; in the other, it is relatively dynamic
and subject to decay. Any difference seems to be one of degree rather
than kind, with for example the tobacco mosaic virus having a foot in
both camps — in effect a continuum of ever-increasing complexity is
assumed: physics into chemistry and chemistry into biology.
On this reckoning therefore, adaptation, or natural selection, is
merely the equilibrium-seeking process that we observe taking place
on the grand scale in a response to minor adjustments to the
otherwise invariant process of self-replication at the molecular level.
Since the biological record now indicates that the process regularly
achieves both new equilibrium and new species in the aftermath of a
crisis (or unitary event), then the actual destruction of species as well
as the introduction of new components at the molecular level, would
seem to be involved in the short periods of change.
Many biologists/scientists still seek to explain these relatively short
periods of change in terms of some kind of instability in the normal
evolutionary process which the evidence indicates is generally robust
and stable. However it now seems clear from the astronomical
perspective that life can no longer be seen as taking place in a closed
box: the Earth’s environment can no longer just be ignored. Purely
internal explanations for periods of rapid change are probably
therefore no longer adequate.
It is conceivable that the moments of crisis not only bring conditions
that lead to the destruction of species, they may also bring brief
additions to the gene pool from outside. The notion that comets are
the fundamental source of biologically active material in the universe
is clearly an important one, enthusiastically espoused by the
astronomers Hoyle and Wickramasinghe 111 in recent years. The idea
is very old however: the astronomer William Herschel, for example,
who found royal favour during the reign of George III, gave it his
support; indeed it could even be said to go back to Plato and in its
guise as the source of kingship, even to the beginnings of
astronomical theory itself. Whatever the final judgment on this old
notion, the history on life on Earth is revealing now that evolution
has a cosmic as well as a terrestrial dimension.
Somehow, then, the Galaxy is exerting a decisive control over both
geological processes and the evolution of life. If only to assess the
current security of homo sapiens, we have to look more closely at the
mechanisms of control involved. It seems, for example, that the
galactic disturbances affect even the core of the Earth, shielded
though it is by an overlying mantle of rock 2,800 kilometres thick
and with twice the rigidity of steel. How can the Galaxy achieve this
feat?