
15 — Terrestrial
Catastrophism
The long history of the Earth, then, is distinguished by a relatively
steady evolution superimposed on which are rapid, sometimes
overwhelming changes, whether in the evolution of life, or mountain
building, or even disturbances in the core itself. Many geologists over
the years have voiced the suspicion that these changes have a galactic
periodicity and have speculated that, somehow, the Galaxy is
affecting the affairs of Earth. What was lacking in all these
speculations was a mechanism for inducing the galactic periodicities;
and it was not until the late 1970's, with the discovery of the
molecular cloud and Apollo asteroid systems, that the mechanism
was discovered. There are two main causative links in the chain
connecting the Galaxy and the Earth. The first of these is the ebb and
flow of the galactic tide which, we have seen, is reflected in the ebb
and flow of comets into the inner planetary system. The second link
is the existence of giant comets. Rare though they are, it is the giant
comets which contain the bulk of the mass which enters the
planetary system, and it is their disintegration products which
interact most strongly and directly with the Earth. As we have seen,
the break-up of a very large comet will produce a wide range of
debris, from objects 10 kilometres across, to probably hundreds of
kilometer-sized bodies, to temporary swarms of sub-kilometre
objects, down to dust, in quantities sufficient to block the path of
sunlight. We now ask, how would the Earth machine respond to the
influx of such material? Consider, first, an asteroid impact.
The largest known asteroid currently in an Earth-crossing orbit is
Hephaistos. It was discovered only in 1978, which gives an indication
of the difficulty of finding these objects, whose diameters are only a
few kilometers and whose surfaces may be as black as soot. We have
seen that this object is ten kilometers in diameter and is in an orbit
very like that of the Taurids, but rotated through about 90 degrees.
Probably, some tens of thousands of years ago, it split from the giant
comet whose debris now circulate along the Taurid track. Hephaistos
is a potential collision hazard, although not immediately so. It would
strike the Earth at just over 30 kilometres/second, with an impact
energy of about 100 million megatons, that is, equivalent to the
simultaneous unleashing of about ten thousand full-scale nuclear
wars. What would happen?
If Hephaistos struck the ocean it would within seconds generate a
cavity in the ocean water and underlying bed about 40 kilometres
wide. It would penetrate the crust to a depth of perhaps 20
kilometres, exposing the underlying hot mantle. A column of water,
steam, rocks and dust many kilometers high would be hurled into the
air, and waves about 5 kilometres high would rise around the impact
site. These would drop to a few hundred meters amplitude at 1,000-
2,000 kilomteres distance but on entering a continental shelf or
shallow seas would rear up again into a tsunami several miles high,
overturn, and generate intense and prolonged turbulence.
The reefs of the world are found in shallow ocean water, generally
less than two hundred feet down. Most of a reef comprises a fine,
sandy material loosely bound by the creatures and plants anchored
to the underlying limestone framework of coral skeletons. The effect
of sudden, violent and prolonged turbulence generated in the seas by
a giant impact would be to uproot and disperse the living part of the
reef and choke the filter-feeding creatures near the base of the food
chain. In addition plankton would suffer through the thick pall of
stratospheric dust which would float down through the air and
greatly reduce sunlight for at least a few months; if photosynthesis
came to a halt, there would be wholesale collapse of food chains.
Many modern plankton are already living at the limit of their
tolerance of ultraviolet light. Above the atmosphere, ultraviolet light
is of lethal intensity. Most of this radiation never reaches the ground,
being absorbed by a layer of ozone in the stratosphere. But the
creation of nitrous oxides in the fireball would react with the ozone
high in the atmosphere, so that when the dust finally settled there
would be an ultraviolet deluge and this would itself cause sweeping
extinctions. Oceanic ecological systems are complex, particularly reef
systems. Because of the lack of seasonal change they are subjected to
very little stress and are therefore not adapted to cope with a major
upset in the environment. They depend on and creating a delicate,
stratified system of organisms adapted to the light available at each
level. Severe turbulence, lack of sunlight, or high ultraviolet dosage
are each lethal to a reef community; and yet these are precisely the
consequences of a large impact. It seems that a colliding Hephaistos
would wipe out the plankton and reef-building communities
worldwide. Presumably, with the base of the food chain undercut,
there would be a domino effect throughout the marine kingdom.
Now there is strong fossil evidence for the occurrence of at least five
major episodes of marine mass extinction (see figure 16), the largest
worldwide in extent and instantaneous to within the resolution of the
stratigraphy. Of these, the extinctions in the late Permian 225 million
years ago were the most severe; there was a ‘mass extinction of truly
dramatic proportions, possibly approaching (though of course not
reaching) complete extinction of marine life’. To produce the
extinction rates observed amongst the classes, orders and families at
the Permo-Trassic boundary, something like 90-96 per cent of
species may have vanished. The organisms which were destroyed
were at all levels of evolutionary development and included the
trilobites, five hundred species of plankton, most sponges and
echinoderms and, most spectacularly, the corals: thousands of
species simply vanished. For ten million years following the event,
coral reefs did not appear anywhere in the world. It seems that this
event and others like it in the marine record cannot be explained in
terms of the normal turnover of species à la Darwinian selection;
there must have been a worldwide catastrophe which affected life
forms en masse. After the event, only 2,000-10,000 marine species
were left. The diversification of life that followed the Permo-Triassic
extinction seems to have been in part a matter of chance, some
unlikely groups faring well, consistent with random events
dominating the survival process: the meek were as likely to inherit
the Earth as the powerful. Land extinctions of apparently
catastrophic nature were also involved, about 80 per cent of reptile
and amphibian families becoming extinct, corresponding to a very
high extinction at the level of species.
If Hephaistos were to strike land, a crater perhaps 200 kilometres
across would be gouged out within a few minutes, with rims several
kilometers high. The basin would flood with lava. An impact in India
would flatten forests in Europe, setting them ablaze. Debris thrown
out of the crater would range from mountain-sized lumps,
themselves formidable missiles, to hot ash, thrown worldwide and
adding to the incineration below. Earthquakes would be felt globally
and would everywhere be at the top end of intensity scales, with
vertical waves many metres high and horizontal ones (e.g. push-andpull waves) of similar amplitude. These waves would run around the
Earth for some hours and would presumably create great
devastation. Land creatures would of course suffer also from the
cutting out of sunlight for months in equatorial regions and possibly
one to three years in polar ones.
The effects of such great impacts then are likely to be felt over at least
continental dimensions on land, and worldwide in the oceans. It is
not surprising therefore that a connection has often been proposed
between past mass extinctions of life on the one hand, and the
impact of comets or giant meteorites on the other. Such suggestions
could only be speculative because what was lacking was, firstly, a
firm astronomical foundation (for example, until recently impact
rates were not known ever approximately), and secondly, evidence
on the ground, say in the form of a large crater. As we have seen,
however, a solitary large impact is, from the astronomical point of
view, unlikely to be the only agency at work; and indeed, when one
looks in more detail at the ‘hard evidence’, both astronomical and
geological, discrepancies in a simple-impact scenario begin to arise.
No extinction has captured the public imagination more, or spawned
a greater variety of suggested causes, than the extinction of the
dinosaurs 65 million years ago. A thriving and complex community,
which had dominated life on Earth for over 140 million years, simply
died out. Perhaps some part of the popular fascination with this great
extinction arises because it included such memorable creatures as
tyrannosaurus rex and diplodocus; or perhaps because it raises the
question whether ‘it could happen to us’. At any rate, many ideas
have been proposed over the years for this mass extinction. One of
these ideas, due to the palaeontologist de Laubenfels in 1956 and the
geophysicist Urey in 1973, that the dinosaurs were wiped out by a
great bolide about 10 kilometres across, was revived in 1980 by a
group of scientists at Berkeley, California 112 in order to explain an
iridium excess discovered by them at the extinction boundary. The
significance of iridium is that it is depleted in the Earth’s crust but
relatively common in meteorites (say two parts in a million). The
presence of this layer was taken to mean that dust had been thrown
up from the impact of such a body, settling worldwide. Evidence and
hypothesis were announced in a blaze of publicity, the theme was
enthusiastically taken up by science journalists, and very soon
geochemists and geologists the world over were seeking iridium
anomalies and other signs of a great destroying impact.
The Berkeley proposal and the method of its announcement thus
stimulated much valuable and detailed research on this important
extinction boundary. Others, more traditionally, continued to argue
that the extinctions were not instantaneous and that interval
processes, dropping sea level and climatic change, were the real
explanations for the mass exterminations. As Raup remarked in
1986: ‘Some ... see these developments as heralding major shifts in
the way we look at earth history and organic evolution. To others, the
past 5 years have seen a science gone mad.’ The controversy, at the
time of writing, shows little sign of abating, opinions frequently
dividing in unexpected directions. For example, the American Earth
science community has tended to favour the idea of a great impact
while the European one has tended to look askance at the idea; the
geochemists have tended to be pro, while most palaeontologists have
generally been anti; and so on. We shall argue shortly that both
views are wrong, and that the broad controversy has arisen
unnecessarily because proper account has not been taken of the
environment of our planet. What is at stake, of course, is an
understanding of the history of the Earth. But the argument is not
simply an academic game: our assessment of the hazard existing now
for mankind depends critically on which of the broad pictures is
nearer the truth.
Whether the dinosaur extinction was a single, dramatic event is a
highly controversial issue and depends on detailed analyses of fossil
remains and their reworking. One school of thought holds that the
dinosaurs were an intelligent, complex, thriving community which
was overwhelmed by sudden catastrophe. Another holds that the
dinosaurs were in decline long before their final extinction. Whether
or not the great extinction was instantaneous, it seems to have taken
place very rapidly in geological terms, even the non-catastrophe
school conceding that the decline in population accelerated rapidly
in the last 300,000 years of the Cretaceous period. There were many
ocean extinctions too at around this time, including important
marine groups such as ammonites, corals and many types of
plankton; again, the rapidity of these extinctions is a controversial
question, periods of 50 years or less having been proposed.
There are problems with the ‘single impact’ interpretation of the
iridium deposition. In the first place the concentration of the element
is too high. An asteroid would excavate several hundred times its
own volume of crustal material and this would of course be mixed in
with the asteroid material. At many sites, however, the iridium has
been diluted by only about twenty times its own volume of material.
While high concentrations might occur locally, around the impact
site, it is clear that overall there is a serious discrepancy. It has also
been argued that in deep-sea cores the iridium is spread through the
large thickness of sediment. Burrowing creatures and the tails of fish
must disturb the sediment, but this so-called bioturbation may at
several sites be insufficient to explain the discrepancy.
Nor does the chemical composition seem to fit the stony meteorite
idea too well, the abundance ratios of rare elements such as osmium
and rhenium being inconsistent with an origin in such a body. There
are enormous and unexplained overabundances in common
elements too, such as antimony and arsenic, relative to meteoritic
material. And the situation has been complicated by a surprising
finding from the eruption in January 1983 of the Hawaiian volcano
Kilauea. 113 Airborne particles collected from the volcano were found
to have very large concentrations of arsenic, selenium and other
elements found in high abundance at the extinction boundary. The
particles were also found to be strikingly rich in iridium. Probably,
this material has come from the upper mantle of the Earth. This
raises the interesting question whether the iridium anomaly might be
a gigantic red herring. For this proposition to work, great volcanisms
must have taken place on Earth 65 million years ago, on a scale some
tens of millions of times greater than the Hawaiian outburst. There
were such eruptions, namely the voluminous outpourings of lava
which gave rise to the Deccan traps in India. The lava from that event
contains little iridium; nevertheless, it is interesting to speculate
whether, had a volcanic source of iridium been known in 1980, a
meteorite impact would have been suggested. It has been suggested
that acid rain from this volcanism might have wiped out the
dinosaurs. On the other hand, protagonists of the impact
hyphothesis can point to an impressive array of evidence.
Catastrophic vegetation changes amounting to a ‘profound ecological
shock’ took place across the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary, at least at
sites studied in North America, Europe and Japan. 114 The
devastation was sudden and could have been produced by blast,
conflagration or sudden freezing several months’ duration. It is also
true that the iridium enhancement is sharp at several locations. And
in 1985 a most interesting discovery was made that very large
amounts of soot are present at the extinction boundary in Denmark,
Spain and New Zealand. 115 It is difficult to avoid the conclusion
reached by the discoveries that wildfires, global in extent, must have
taken place during the extinction. On the other hand, not a trace of
meteoritic debris, say in the form of stony inclusions in the
sediments, has ever been found at the boundary.
How are these discrepancies to be resolved? As we have stated,
despite its almost universal adoption by the ‘catastrophist’ school
throughout the 1980's, the stray impact of a 10-kilometre bolide is
not, from the astronomical point of view, particularly realistic.
Enough is now known about the interplanetary and galactic
environment to permit the construction of a realistic astronomical
framework for terrestrial catastrophism. This framework turns out to
be quite difficult from the simplistic one which has been widely
adopted by the new catastrophism:
1. The astronomical environment as we have described it leads
one to expect as the prime process, not solitary random impacts
but bombardment episodes, galactically controlled. These
impose a temporal pattern on Earth processes.
2. Within an impact episode, events are dictated by a handful of
rare giant comets. The disintegration of these bodies liberates
copious amounts of dust into meteor streams, the dust
spreading out to form dense, temporary zodiacal clouds which
may be several hundred times as massive as the one existing at
the present day. The Earth, orbiting within this complex of
debris, is subjected to a barrage of large bodies but also
experiences large and intermittent inputs of dust into the
stratosphere. If the comet is large, and the dust sufficiently fine,
sunlight might be greatly dimmed at ground level for as long as
the dust cloud or meteor stream persists: this may be hundreds
or thousands or tens of thousands of years. If only a hundred
thousandth part of a gram enters each square centimeter of the
Earth’s atmosphere each year, severe climate effects
inevitably follow. The Earth becomes blanketed in a white veil.
The veil scatters sunlight back into space; but on the other hand
it is transparent to infrared radiation, that is heat, from the
ground. The Earth can therefore lose heat but cannot gain it.
The result is a traumatic drop in the mean temperature of the
globe. Over the few million years of an impact episode there
could be something like fifty such dusting of the stratosphere.
3. The Earth may run into swarms of bodies, each with the
potential for numerous blasts and global conflagration, as well
as a number of larger Apollo asteroids.
The spectacular prompt effects of a series of impacts, then, will
complete with environment deterioration caused by a series of sharp,
climatic coolings. These will lower the level of the seas. A cold Earth
transfers water from the oceans; ice caps grow larger and mountain
glaciers form. The seas recede from the continental margins, which is
more bad news for coral reefs. A great deal of water can be locked up
in ice: the present Antarctic ice cap is larger than Europe and two
thousand metres deep. In all, ice covers about one-twelfth of the land
area of the continents. If it were all to melt, the level of the oceans
would rise by 60 metres. The astronomy tells us, then, that an
episode of mass extinction of life will often be a complex, prolonged
and traumatic affair. This complicated reality will manifest itself in
the stratigraphic history of the Earth.
These expectations may be matched against the geological and
biological records. In the first place, Earth history does seem to have
an episodic character superimposed on a periodic one, the timescales
associated with each fitting the galactic expectations. Second, the
high concentrations of iridium found at the dinosaur extinction
boundary at several localities, and the absence of bulk meteoritic
debris, are hard to explain in terms of a single big bang but easily
understood in terms of zodiacal dust as an important provider of the
input. Third, there is increasing evidence for a multiplicity of impacts
at the dinosaur extinction boundary. The evidence takes the form of
various shocked quartz particles, 116 formed in different hypervelocity impacts, and in the precise dating of a small crater, the
Manson crater, at the extinction boundary which could not have
caused the extinction by itself and which therefore seems to have
come in as part of a swarm or shower. Fourth, the predilection for
occasional swarms may account for the huge amount of soot at the
dinosaur extinction boundary: if laid down instantaneously, about a
quarter of the biomass of the Earth was probably consumed in flame.
An Earth ablaze is within the capacity of an exceptionally intense
swarm to produce, but probably beyond that of even a Hephaistossized impact.
In 1989, amino acids were found at a well-studied Danish
Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary site. These particular compounds
were of non-biological origin but of a sort which are not found on
Earth. As extraterrestrial markers, therefore, they are probably more
significant than say iridium, which might be volcanic. Their
occurrence around the dinosaur extinction boundary is therefore
important evidence that a major extraterrestrial input was involved.
However, it is difficult to see how these compounds, which were laid
down over a metre above and below the extinction level, could have
been brought in by a 10-kilometre bolide. The fireball in the impact
reaches temperatures typically 100,000 C, more than enough to
destroy these and indeed any compounds. It seems then that the
material probably arrived as comet dust of submicron size, trickling
down through the atmosphere over some tens of thousands of years.
The temperatures reached by such panicles during entry are modest
and of only a few seconds’ duration, enough to permit survival of the
compounds.
There are fundamental effects in the response, not only of life on
Earth, but also of the Earth itself. In figure 16 the half dozen largest
marine extinction events are plotted along with the variations of sea
level over the past 570 million years. 117 On each occasion the ocean
level has dropped by several hundred metres before the mass
extinction: it is as if the Earth knew that a huge missile was coming!
This has been used as an argument in favour of a purely terrestrial
process as causing mass extinction of species, as has the huge
simultaneous volcanism of 65 million years ago: it is claimed that
either or both wiped out the dinosaurs without intervention from the
sky.
But of course this uniformitarian argument is unsound. The sea level
regressions are indeed surely inexplicable in terms of a ‘stray impact’
picture; 118 but, as we have seen, it is the wrong picture for the
uniformitarians to attack. This illustrates the point that much of the
controversy over the impact question has arisen because the
protagonists have either misunderstood the nature of the
astronomical environment or ignored it altogether. 119 The
significance of the correlation between the sea-level regressions and
the mass extinctions is that another fundamental terrestrial
phenomenon, the level of the oceans, is being affected through
stratospheric dusting and the concomitant global cooling.
We can further illustrate this approach by examining the event of
about 42 million years ago, which saw the beginnings of the
primates, and was connected not only with vulcanisms of the Pacific
basin and disturbance of the floor of the Indian Ocean, but also with
major changes in the chemistry of the oceans and with a severe
cooling of the Earth. The extinctions of that period (impact epoch
number 3 of Seyfert and Sirkin) are in phase with the 15- and 30-
million-year cycles, as are the dinosaur extinctions.
Detailed studies of the microscopic fossils covering this period have
been carried out. 120 These fossils were recovered from deep sea
drillings in the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific oceans and should
therefore give a global view of the extinctions of the period. About 70
percent of the plankton became extinct (with a possibly synchronous
mass extinction of land mammals). The fossils from the three oceans
show that the extinctions did not take place in a single huge
catastrophe; rather, they were spread over an interval of several
million years. These events are associated with sharp, step-like
coolings of the globe, on land as well as in the sea. Clearly, a single
impact could not achieve this.
On the other hand, there are indications of cosmic inputs over the
time span of the extinctions. About 1-10 billion tons of small glassy
stones usually regarded as impact ‘splash’ material (the North
American tektites) cover much of the Earth’s surface, but they do not
coincide with any of the planktonic extinctions. An excess of the rare
element iridium near the boundary was discovered in Caribbean
cores. This element is common in meteorites and, we have seen, its
presence has usually been taken as an impact signature. There are
also some microtektite layers. The iridium layer does not coincide
with any of these, having been laid down about 30,000-100,000
years before the nearest of them. This is once again inconsistent with
a single random impact but is best explained by the infall of about 50
billion tons of dust (say 50 million tons a year for a thousand years)
on to the Earth, followed by the impact of a few-kilometre-diameter
fragment from the same meteor stream. The dust input is several
hundred times that at the present day. These must have been
traumatic times! Once again, then, the overall extinction, lasting
some millions of years, is best explained by a bombardment episode
of a few million years duration and dominated by the disintegration
products of great comets — kilometer-sized asteroids and dust infall
from dense meteor streams, the dust especially plunging the Earth
into long, cold epochs. The dust intermittently kicked up by the
multiple impacts would of course add to the chaos. Overall, the effect
is that of a prolonged battering of the environment.
In 1986 the palaeontologist Jablonski 121 reported a detailed study
which he had carried out on the extinction pattern of marine bivalves
in the Atlantic coastal region. The study covered a 16 million year
period which encompassed the great extinction of 65 million years
ago. An interesting result of this analysis was the discovery that the
pattern of extinction, during the mass event, was not just an
intensification of the background extinction: in particular, species
might vanish during a mass extinction for reasons which had no
connection with their robustness during normal times. Major
environmental change, rather than Darwinian competition, forced
the evolutionary pace; and once again, the meek were as likely as the
strong to inherit the Earth. The mass extinction was therefore
something special, qualitatively different in its effects.
Now, it appears that the semi-regular spacing of such extinctions,
studies of which have so far been limited to the last 250 million
years, marches in time with the other Earth processes such as the
magnetic field reversals, and with the impact episodes as found from
the cratering record. Thus, if the Holmes cycles are real, fundamental
geological processes are being modulated or even caused by galactic
forces.
The evidence for continental drift for example is usually taken to
reflect an underlying pattern of continually applied stresses forcing a
slow movement of the asthenosphere, the semi-molten rock on
which the continental plates ride. But such continuity does not easily
account for the intermittent if not cyclic nature of the plate tectonic
phenomena. Seyfert and Sirkin proposed that multiple impacts
might generate plumes of hot material rising from the mantle, their
combined force breaking plates apart and causing them to separate.
The greatest lava outpourings in the history of the Earth have
occurred at intervals of about 400 million years, and ocean basins
may open and close in about 500-million-year intervals. Over such
an interval, the largest single impactor expected is about 25-30
kilometres in diameter. Its impact energy is about 2.5 billion
megatons, 25 times that of a Hephaistos collision. Such an energy is
about that involved in the formation of the multi-ringed Mare
Orientale basin on the Moon. An impact of this magnitude on Europe
would fluidize the continent. Brittle fracture of rocks would take
place down to about 15 kilometres depth. Along fault lines, rock
failure takes place at lower shock pressures and a very large impact
would open up cracks over approximately hemispheric dimensions.
The opening up of these fissures would produce a fluid magma
invading these fissures, and might further drive global volcanism.
The seismic energy from such an impact is best left to the
imagination: earthquakes alone might exterminate all vertebrate life
on Earth. Plate motions are very likely to be affected by such a
disturbance to the underlying asthenosphere. The generation of a
crater 500 kilometres wide is likely to involve some vertical crustal
motion which will itself greatly perturb the flow of asthenosphere
material, at least within a few thousand kilometers. Very large
impacts may therefore, as proposed by Seyfert and Sirkin, carry
enough energy to affect plate motions.
The South African geologist Hartnady 122 has suggested that a 300
kilometre wide circular depression, about 500 kilometres north-east
of Madagascar, may be the site of a great impact of 65 million years
ago. He has pointed out that this feature, the Amirante basin, was at
the centre of a sudden shift of the mid-ocean ridge at that time, the
ridge jumping over 500 kilometres to the north-east. He has also
pointed to the existence of a massive submarine slide of sediments,
covering 20,000 square kilometers, on the east coast of Africa, as
one might expect from the generation of a huge tsunami. Just across
the water are the Deccan traps of about the same age, which (we had
previously suggested) might have been caused by the triggering of
volcanoes from a large impact. It is possible then that a major impact
from that period has been identified. It is unlikely, however, to have
been the only one, and in fact the shocked quartz particles discovered
at the boundary indicate that land impacts also must have been
involved.
Smaller impacts generate less disturbance but in the course of an
impact episode it is likely that fault lines will be extensively broken
by smaller bodies; the disturbances may still be large over plate
dimensions and capable of inducing the orogenic and tectonic
episodes identified by Holmes, Seyfert and Sirkin and others.
To reverse the Earth’s magnetic field, impacts must profoundly
disturb the motions in the fluid core of the Earth. An oblique impact
will change the rotation of the Earth by a very small amount. In the
hours following a large impact, waves will run around the crust and
mantle of the Earth, gradually dissipating their energy. Within a
week the Earth will have acquired a new direction and period of
rotation, differing by say less than one part in 100 million from the
previous values. However the liquid core of the Earth does not pick
up the new spin immediately and carries on in the old direction. At
the interface between the mantle and the core, stresses are set up
and there are large disturbances in the fluid velocity. It seems that
these impacts may seriously affect the dynamo which generates the
Earth’s magnetic field.
An indirect but probably even more effective mechanism is the
formation of a large ice cap from a sudden cooling. The consequent
reduction of sea level, say by 100 metres, increases the equatorial
velocity of the Earth by about 0.5 centimetres a second, which is
about ten times higher than the flow velocities in the Earth’s core. A
rapid climatic change from the dusting of the stratosphere would
therefore lead to a major disturbances of the flow pattern in the
liquid core. Or, the mechanism for both vulcanisms and magnetic
field disturbances may be simpler: the mere load shifting as ice caps
come and go may set up stresses enough to disturb the Earth in
mantle and core, and cause these effects.
It is then possible, in principle, that either an oblique impact or a
large climatic disturbance, the latter arising either from impact or
direct meteoric input, would upset the geomagnetic dynamo and
cause a field reveral. 123 It is unlikely, however, that the sporadic
background of ordinary kilometer-sized comets is adequate to force
the pace. The tendency to reversal will be most pronounced during a
comet shower, when a large comet is shedding its material into the
Earth’s environment.
The Earth, then, is a huge storehouse of information relating to its
continuous interaction with the Galaxy through the agency of very
large comets. The variety and complexity of all the physical, chemical
and biological processes involved represents but a fraction of the
information that may yet come our way to clarify and reinforce our
understanding of what is going on. There is no question, therefore,
that the current picture of what happens is still incomplete. But the
essence of the scientific analysis that is described here is the rigour of
the continuing search for the simplest composite picture that meets
all the relevant data in a straightforward way. One thing stands out
however: the importance of very large comets.
However, in arriving at such a conclusion, it is a necessary part of the
scientific process that some experts will pursue alternative models, if
only to make sure they do not work! Some, for reasons best known to
themselves but possibly out of inertia or lack of imagination, will
continue to assume the Earth is isolated in space, despite the
enormous variety of information to the contrary. Others will select
some of the evidence to their liking and invent things in the sky that
nobody has seen to meet their particular targets. The nature of our
environment is clearly of fundamental interest to mankind and there
is always a risk, on account of the subject’s importance, that the
unwary reader may likewise be captivated by invented schemes that
only go a very little way towards explaining everything we see.
For the sake of completeness, we may illustrate this problem by
referring to a rather bizarre speculation 124 put forward by two
groups of scientists in 1984, one of them associated with the Berkeley
stable which had revived the stray meteorite hypothesis only four
years earlier. With the rediscovery by Raup and Sepkoski in 1984 of
cyclicity in the fossil marine record, and the similar rediscovery of
periodicity in the cratering record, it was seen that the stray
meteorite hypothesis would have to be abandoned (the long-standing
earlier work on these periodicities having until then been ignored.)
The account for the ‘new’ cyclicity, a faint companion star in orbit
around the Sun was arbitrary invoked. If this star had a 26-millionyear period of revolution around the Sun, and if there is a dense,
undiscovered ‘inner cloud’ of comets which also orbit the Sun, then
every 26 million years the companion, pursuing an eccentric orbit,
would dip into this inner cloud and perturb its comets, generating a
brief and very intense comet shower. The Berkeley group, with
dramatic flair, named the star Nemesis.
The astronomical objections to this proposal are numerous, and in
the normal course of events it would undoubtedly have remained an
entertaining and obscure speculation. However, once more, the
hypothesis was announced in a blaze of publicity, the theme was
enthusiastically taken up by science journalists, it became the topic
of popular books and television shows, and once more, to many
workers in the Earth sciences, unfamiliar with astronomy, it must
have seemed that a new and substantial proposal was being made.
Certainly the companion-star hypothesis adopts the central
mechanism of the galactic one, namely the creation of comet showers
through regular comet cloud disturbances. However, the idea that
the forcing is caused by a companion star rather than the Galaxy
meets with insuperable problems.
In the first place, to have a period of 26-32 million years or so, the
binary would be at a mean distance of about 90,000 a.u.
(astronomical units) from the Sun, going out to around 180,000 a.u.
at its furthest point. Now binary stars are very common in the
Galaxy, but pairs as wide as the system postulated are almost
completely unknown and are found only amongst very young stars,
only a few million years of age. Amongst stars as old as the Sun, the
maximum separation of binary components is about 5,000 a.u. The
authors of the hypothesis seemed to be unaware that what they were
postulating was a system of a type which is, so far as is known from
many sky surveys, non-existent. 125 The reason there are no very
wide binaries amongst stars of solar age stripped away when the
Solar System encounters a giant nebula; the same happens to wide
binaries. The wider they are, the more weakly they are gravitationally
bound to the Sun and the shorter their survival times. It is easily
shown that Nemesis would orbit the Sun for only a few hundred
million years before being pulled from its orbit by a passing massive
nebula and thrown into interstellar space. The probability of its
having survived for the 4,500-million-year history of the Solar
System is negligible.
It might be that Nemesis was originally in a smaller, less easily
dislodged orbit, and has just recently been thrown into its supposed
present one. But the Earth periodicities are known to go back at least
200 million years, and it is still very unlikely that the star would
remain bound to the Sun over that period. Additionally, although the
companion could be given a longer life by supposing it was originally
in a tighter orbit, comets would then have been swept up at a much
higher rate in the past, say more than a billion years ago. Depending
on the structure of the comet cloud, the impact cratering rate from
the disturbed comets would have been hundreds or thousands of
times higher than the present rate. We have a record of past
disturbances in the form of the lunar cratering, and it is clear (figure
17) that comets are most unlikely in the past to have been thrown
into the planetary system at these very high rates; indeed the average
bombardment rate has not systematically changed for the last 3.9
billion years.
Figure 17. Lunar cratering history, form 3.9 billion years ago to
the present (due to Baldwin). The average impact rate has been
relatively constant although surges lasting not more than 50-100
million years of uncertain date are also present. A huge reservoir
of potential impactors is implied, along with a relatively steady
input mechanism. The Galaxy may both replenish and disturb
the cloud of comets surrounding the Solar System. The high
impact rate 3-9 Byr ago and even higher rates earlier are
ascribed to the mopping up of debris left over form the origin of
the planetary system, and are apparently unrelated to the
cratering history since.
Finally, the companion star is supposed to be roughly at the farthest
point of its orbit from the Sun, which would put us half way between
bombardment episodes. This is inconsistent with the evidence for a
recent disturbances of comet cloud and Earth (table 5). There are
other severe problems of a more technical nature, but enough has
perhaps been said.
It seems quite extraordinary that a hypothesis so lacking in scientific
depth has spawned so much attention, even within the scientific
community itself. Normally a new idea, such as this, does not gain
approval until it has run the gauntlet of peer review and scientific
publication, but in this instance, the attention of the media appears
to have been whipped up in advance, more in the style of show
business than science, and one can only assume that the normal
academic processes was somehow distorted by the publicity. Of
course, the chief defect of Nemesis is its superfluity, a fact which was
concealed by the fanfare of publicly with which the theory was
announced. From what is now known of the Galaxy, and the
population of small bodies in the Solar System, periodic disturbances
of the Earth through bombardment episodes are expected. That
these episodes were the cause of great mass extinctions including the
dinosaur extinction of 65 million years ago; that the Earth itself
would be disturbed through worldwide vulcanisms, magnetic field
reversals and so on; and that these global events would be forced
with galactic periodicities, and been specifically predicted on
astronomical grounds before the iridium discussions or the
rediscovery of the terrestrial cycles. Nemesis, like the ‘theory of the
stray meteorite’ which went before it, therefore simply goes beyond
the astrophysical requirements at the present time. That is, the
Nemesis hypothesis was an unnecessary ad hoc response to the
terrestrial periodicities, the galactic theory having predicted them in
the first place.
The astronomical framework, grounded in celestial observations, is
the basis for the theory of terrestrial catastrophism described here.
The extraordinary misconception that, on the contrary, proper
astronomical theorizing can only follow the terrestrial discoveries,
whether iridium or periodicities, has since been put about by some of
the Earth science community. Thus the paleontologist
Raup: 126 ‘After Sepkoski and I proposed a 26-million-year stationary
extinction periodicity, several astrophysical explanations were
proposed’; the geologist Flallam: ‘The only hard evidence for
disturbance of the Oort (comet) cloud is the iridium anomaly’; and so
on. The reader will by now recognize such statements as nonsense,
but they are not untypical. Possibly the blazing publicity which
accompanied the Berkeley ideas brought about this curious approach
to knowledge. More probably the new developments have come as a
surprise and what we have observed is a certain lack of reflection as
Earth scientists jostle to achieve prominence in what is now widely
recognized to be a seminal era in the advance of human knowledge.
However that may be, it is in our view essential, if one is to arrive at a
true picture, to take account of all the relevant evidence: ‘hard
evidence’ in the geologist’s sense has to be coupled with some respect
for hard astronomical facts as well. Put another way, we do not need
a 10-kilometre asteroid to land in our presence to demonstrate the
amount of kinetic energy it will release. In particular, the correct
picture must explain recent as well as past events in the terrestrial
period. Thus the giant comet, and indeed the historical record, are
essential elements in the quest for overall truth. It is this inextricable
linkage between the very recent and the very remote past which
lends urgency to the study: if we get the grand picture wrong, the
next set of old bones in the ground could be ours.