
16 — The Naked Ape
There is, of course, a transition between the catastrophism of
geology, and that of history. The transition is one of timescale, and it
is bridged by mankind. Human beings, in common with monkeys,
apes and lemurs, belong to the order of primates. The origin of this
order, like much to do with human evolution, is lost in the mists of
time and the fog of controversy. It is likely that some time between
40 and 44 million years ago, around the time of the EoceneOligocene events, there was a precursor, a creature which was
neither monkey nor ape nor lemur, but something in between. Some
have identified this creature as amphipithecus, an animal about the
size of a monkey whose fossilized jawbones have been found in
Burma. If this is correct, then our remote grandparents were fruiteating, tree-living creatures. Of course, if the ancestral primates
originated in south-east Asia, it raises the problem of how their
monkey descendants come to be in South America. Possibly they
spread into Africa across what is now the Red Sea, and then reached
the New World by island-hopping across the Atlantic, which was
then much narrower and contained a string of volcanic islands.
Another possible route is through northern Asia, across the Bering
Straits and down the west coast of North America. Whatever the
route, it would have been covered not by purposeful migration but by
the random movements of thousands of generations.
At about the time our ancestor appeared, the Earth was seized by a
geological convulsion: our roots lie in a bombardment episode.
Forty-two million years ago, intense volcanic activity spread
throughout the whole Pacific area, from Japan to the Peruvian
Andes, in New Zeland and the island arcs and trenches of the
Philippines. The sea floor itself, from the Indian Ocean to far
northern latitudes, was profoundly disturbed, the floor of the Indian
Ocean, for example, beginning to spread rapidly out from a central
volcanic ridge. Nor was this great disturbance confined to the Pacific
Ocean. In Africa, there was a sudden uplifting of land in Kenya. The
same happened to the western side of North America. And it was a
time of intense mountain building which saw, for example, the rise of
the Pyrenees in Europe.
Coincident with these great upheavals was a dramatic cooling of the
Earth, in the form of a series of rapid and sharp temperature drops.
The oceans became cold both at the surface and in deep waters. This
was reflected in an accelerated extinction of many important
categories of plankton, the extinctions happening in a step-like
manner matching the temperature drops. On land, although many
parts of the globe remained warm in summer, winters in equatorial
regions developed a Siberian harshness. By the time this period had
grown to a close, a few million years later, the mammal population
had crashed and the forests of the Earth had shrunk: palm trees had
vanished form Greenland, and the jungle from England.
As the trees receded, grasslands spread in their place, and
grasseating creatures spread with them. Ancestral horses and camels
appeared, and early elephants with long snouts. With the grasseaters
came the hunters, primitive cats and dogs. As the climate moderated,
the mammals diversified. Many living groups have ancestors going
back to that distant time: moles, bats, rabbits, mice, whales, seals,
kangaroos and others, about five thousand species in all. It was in
East Africa that the evolution of the progenitor humans and apes
seems to have progressed. Its climate around 22 million BC was
warm and its landscape was a mixture of grassland, woodland and
forest. The evolution of the primates can be reconstructed in part
from the fossil record, in part from slight biochemical affinities
between living species: we carry our remote genealogy in our blood.
From such lines of evidence it has been inferred that a growing split
between ancestral monkeys on the one hand, and the lineage which
led to the orang-utan, the gorilla, the chimpanzee and man on the
other, was under way some time after 22 million BC.
Around 15 million BC, the Earth was seized by another geological
trauma. This was one of the periodic pulses we have described, the
Solar System at this time being at a critical stage in its galactic orbit,
and back along the massive Orion spiral arm. Once more, there was a
global increase in volcanic activity along with lava outpourings in
many areas around the world. The Alps, Andes and Taurus mountain
ranges rose and folded. There were major deflections in the
spreading of the sea floor, and Baha California split from Mexico.
This disturbance was of great evolutionary significance: Africa
drifted into Europe and Asia, squeezing out the ancient Tethys Sea
which had separated them. Thus a bridge was formed, and the apelike creatures and other mammals migrated across it into Eurasia.
The climate in the region straddling bridge was warm and seasonal,
and forests were widespread. It is likely that the great apes developed
from an ancestral stock during this time. It is likely also that the very
first true hominid, directly ancestral to man, dates from this period.
Ramapithecus and Sivapithecus, whose fossils are found in the
Himalayan foothills of India and Pakistan, date from this period.
They are, probably, proto-men.
A fog of uncertainty surrounds the evolution of these proto-men for
the next ten or more million years. It is known that man-like
creatures were walking on two legs around 4 million years ago, their
footprints having been uncovered in Tanzania and a half-complete
skeleton having been found in Ethiopia. These are the earliest
undisputed hominids. They lived in communities, in open savanna.
Other than this, little is known of their lifestyle.
Between 2.5 and 2 million years ago, the planet was yet again
disturbed. Volcanic ash recovered from ocean sediments obtained
during deep sea drilling seems to show a dramatic increase in the
rate of explosive activity over the last 2 million years. Certainly on
land there was increased volcanism in New Zealand, Japan, the
Andes, Mexico, Iceland, the African Rift valley and elsewhere. This
trend is illustrated in figure 18 where the number of ash layers
measured in various deep-sea drilling sites and lava outpourings
around Hawaii, are shown. The oceanic record as a whole goes back
only 20 million years, but it is clear from the 60-million-year span
covered by the Hawaiian record that there were surges of activity
about 40 million BC, 15 million BC and recently (say 2 or 3 million
BC).
But now a new element enters into the picture: ice. For a long period
of time, going back perhaps 65 million years, the Earth has been
cooling. Sixty-five million years ago there were no polar caps,
although it is likely that the polar seas froze over in winter. But about
20 million years ago, permanent ice caps began to develop. About 10
million years ago, glaciers began to flow down high mountain tops.
And about 2.5 million years ago, ice sheets began to spread over
large areas of land in the northern hemisphere. These last 2.5 million
years have seen the onset of what promises to be a long, cold ice
epoch on our planet.
Figure 18. Outpourings of lava from various oceanic sites. Peaks
in the output can be seen at around 40 million years ago, some
15-10 million years ago, and within the last few million years.
These epochs are consistent with the peaks in the cratering
record
At this time also, the African hominids underwent a further
evolutionary change. At least two species of proto-men arose. There
was a small-brained vegetarian, Australopithecus, who existed for a
million years and then, for unknown reasons, became extinct. A
creature with a larger brain, homo habilis, lasted until just over 1.5
million BC. There is evidence that these primitive African hominids
used stone implements.
The first sophisticated toolmakers, probably the direct ancestors of
modern man, appear about 1.6 million years BC. Their earliest
remains are found in Africa, but by 1 million years BC they were
present as far away as China and survived there until at least
230,000 BC.
Remarkably, it seems from genetic studies of modern human types
that at most a few hundred individuals migrated from Africa and that
this single group gave rise to both the Mongoloid and Caucasian
races. Be that as it may, a cave near Beijing (the former Peking) was
occupied continuously by these toolmakers for nearly a quarter of a
million years before the accumulated detritus finally forced Peking
Man out. He was able to hunt, he could control if not make fire, and
he could cook. And then, less than 200,000 years ago, homo erectus
was replaced by early forms of modern man. Neanderthal man, the
most conspicuous form of these subspecies, was a powerful,
muscular creature with strong teeth which may have been used for
chewing hides. He was a European, living a hardly life on the fringes
of the great ice sheets. Behaviourally, he was quite unlike ourselves.
Intellectually, he may well have been our equal.
While these evolutionary trends were under way, the ice epoch came
and went in a series of ice ages, each lasting for typically 100,000
years. True modern man appeared 40,000 to 45,000 years ago,
probably during a warm period between glaciations. Neanderthal
man vanished. But then, 40,000 years ago, the Earth was plunged
into another ice age. The temperature fell with astonishing speed,
perhaps within a decade, the whole Earth (north and south)
becoming about 15 C colder than it is now. The cold reached its peak
20,000 years ago. An ice sheet half a mile thick covered Ireland,
Britain, the North Sea, central Europe and northern Russia. Another
one covered Greenland and North America down to New York and
the Great Lakes. These sheets were thicker to the north, reaching a
depth of 1.5 miles over Scandinavia and Canada. Yet somehow a
series of migrations took place over the frozen ice sheets and across
the land bridge which is now the Bering Straits, so peopling the
Americas.
And then, almost as suddenly as it came, the ice age vanished. By
around 9,000 BC, it was over; the ice sheets had retreated to
Greenland, the huge mountain glaciers had vanished from Scotland
and Switzerland, and the climate was suddenly warmer. We can still
see the recent signs in the freshly sculpted valleys of northern
Europe, the glacial moraines and erratic boulders which strew
Swedish fields, and the fact that Scandinavia is rising, an inch a year,
rebounding up from the release of the overlying mass of ice.
The retreat of the ice brought arid, semi-desert conditions to
northern Africa, Arabia and the near East. Fertile conditions were
now to be found only in elongated strips alongside rivers, or in oases.
The human apes could no longer maintain themselves by roaming
over wide territories: the domestication of animals and the growth of
crops followed. Alongside the great rivers, the need for irrigation and
tillage of large areas forced men to co-operate in numbers far larger
than a hunting group. Neolithic settlements were replaced by the
village and town. Cities then followed, the evident precursors of
empires and prospective world domination.
With the departure of the ice, then, the human ape has surged
forward, the process of cultural evolution apparently greatly
outstripping biological evolution. Whereas in the previous 30,000
years man had hunted in groups, used stone tools and weapons, lived
in small settlement, painted and carved, and appears to have had
some sort of belief in totemism, in the 10,000 years following the
retreat of the ice, civilization has now emerged. Civilization, it seems,
is a part of the process enabling the human ape to generate the
surplus that supports some of his number as technologists and
scientists, architects, artists, writers, philosophers and priests, and it
is by the output of these leisured groups that it is often judged.
Another measure of civilization is the extent of its control over
Nature. By this second yardstick, it seems that the astonishing
growth of science and technology over the past three hundred years
has put homo sapiens in a dominant position, not only within his
community of primates but within the animal kingdom as a whole.
By now, the human ape can hardly see beyond the cultural surge in
which he is enmeshed. He learns to accept leisure and dominance as
his birthright. Earth history, human history, cultural history become
what they seem, an undeviating progress towards civilization itself.
There is, however, another dimension to the story. For out of the sky,
we now learn, there may occasionally appear a cataract of fire, a
celestial catastrophe which emerges suddenly to terrorize and
destroy. Between cataracts, the human ape is tempted to develop
empire and culture, the captivating prelude to dominance and
leisure, only to be lulled into a sense of false security, there by failing
to see the cosmic forces him ...
All of this brings us finally to the question: to what extent are we now
secure, and to what extent is our progressive mastery over Nature
during the past 5,000 years an illusion, a mere quiet spell before
some uncontrollable change overwhelms us?