
17 — A Risk Assessment
If the ‘stray meteorite’ hypothesis, revived by the Berkeley school and
uncritically adopted by a large segment of the American Earth
science community, should turn out to be correct, the mean interval
between devastating impacts is then reassuringly long. Likewise, if
the Nemesis proposal is correct, we are half way between comet
showers and need not worry about major impacts for another 15
million years. If, however, the galactic hypothesis is broadly right,
the story is different. For in that case we are still in the tail end of an
impact episode and are living in the wake of the most recent giant
comet enter the realm of the inner planets as a consequence of that
episode. This comet, in our picture, has been responsible for a
potentially devastating impact in the twentieth century; swarm
activity and a near-million-megaton lunar impact in the Middle
Ages; a Dark Age over Europe a few centuries earlier; widespread
destruction of civilization in at least the second millennium BC, the
Biblical Flood at the start of the third; and most traumatic of all, the
last ice age, an event which retarded the development of the human
species for 20,000 years. Clearly, in assessing the hazards now faced
by mankind, we have to get the grand astronomical picture right. Our
view, expressed in these pages, is that the scientific case is strongly in
favour of the galactic theory.
The astronomical community has so far shown little awareness of the
potential human consequences of even a single impact. For example,
in a very recent textbook on comets the astronomers Brandt and
Chapman state that one expects a Tunguska-like impact about once
in every 2,000 years, the devasted area from such being fairly local.
They add that ‘No one should lose much sleep over this situation
even if agitated by uninformed doomsayers.’ Leonard Kulik’s study of
the Tunguska event, on the other hand, led him to a very different
perspective: there is no reason whatever why a similar visitation
should not fall at any moment upon a more populous region. Had
this meteorite fallen in central Belgium there would have been no
living creature left in the whole country. Had it fallen in New York ...
all life in the central area of the meteor’s impact would have been
blotted out instantaneously.
Notwithstanding Kulik’s warning, there seems to be a view abroad
that the ‘responsible’ attitude to take towards impact hazards is one
of public reassurance, presumably as a counter to uninformed
doomsaying. However given what we have now seen of comet
Encke’s progenitor, one suspects that, behind such attitudes, there
may lie uninformed complacency. And, as our ‘nuclear error’ sketch
indicates, there may be a new dimension to the problem which did
not exist in Kulik’s time. Clearly, it is important neither to exaggerate
nor underrate the cosmic hazards revealed in this book, but to
discuss them as realistically as possible. We therefore ask: how often
do we expect natural missiles to strike the Earth at the present time,
singly or in swarms, and how plausible is the scenario with which we
(hopefully) alarmed the reader early in this book?
IMPACT RATES
It seems to be a rule of Nature that the larger the body, the rarer it is.
Certainly the rule holds for the assorted bodies which belong to the
Solar System. Away from town lights, on a clear dark night, and with
dark-adapted eyes, shooting stars can be seen every few minutes.
These particles are usually only a fraction of a millimeter across. In a
few weeks of constant observing, one might see a brilliant fireball,
bright enough to light up the landscape as it streaks across the sky.
This is usually caused by a fluffy body the size of a pea coming in at
about 60,000 miles an hour (25 kilometres a second). At the other
end of the scale, as we have seen, we deal with life-extinguishing
monsters, bodies tens of kilometers across which unload millions or
billions of megatons of energy on to the Earth, and which arrive on
geological timescales. But what lies between?
This problem may be approached in a number of ways (see The
Cosmic Serpent). One way is to look at surviving impact craters on
Earth. One must scale up from this by estimating how many craters
have gone unrecorded through erosion and so on, and how many
missiles failed to reach the ground in the first place. Iron meteorites
comprise only a small fraction of all bodies but because they survive
passage through the atmosphere intact they are responsible for a
disproportionate number of holes in the ground. The trouble with
this approach is the extreme incompleteness of the record. Only eight
craters probably due to iron meteorites are known, more than 100
metres across; and yet one might reasonably expect five hundred to
have been created since the end of the last ice age. Likewise only five
iron craters more than a kilometer across are known, whereas the
rate at which iron bolides enter the atmosphere leads one to expect
fifty to have been generated over the last million years.
The Barringer crater in the Arizona desert is about 1.2 kilometres
across and is probably 40,000 or so years old. From the size of this
crater it can be calculated that the missile must have had an impact
energy in the range 5-15 megatons, and from the debris scattered
around it is known also that the missile was an iron meteorite. In fact
for the most part only meteorites made of iron would reach the
ground to produce a crater in this energy range; those made of stone
would on the whole produce a shower of little craters; those made of
ice, that is cometary fireballs, would break up in the air. The record
of falls over the years shows that, amongst the bodies entering the
atmosphere with such energies, perhaps about 1 in 70 are irons. Iron
meteorites are unlikely to be cometary products and probably from a
more steady background of bodies thrown into the inner planetary
system from the asteroid belt. This is consistent with the fact that 2
of the 50 known Earth-crossing asteroids have metallic surfaces.
Scaling up from an incomplete record with this uncertain conversion
factor, one finds that for every impact producing a crater like the one
in the Arizona desert, there must have been about 70 which have left
no trace; instead of one such impact in 40,000 years we expect one
land impact every 600 years. But of course, for every land impact we
expect two in the oceans, and these would leave no trace.
This line of argument leads one to expect a collision of several
megatons energy to occur somewhere on Earth every 200 years or
so. Overall, we reached the conclusion that ‘a few dozen sporadic
impacts in the tens of megatons, and a few in the 100 to 1,000
megaton range, must have occurred within the past 5,000 years’. For
comparison a strategic warhead has typically half a megaton
explosive energy. These are average impact rates; they do not take
account of the possibility of surges of activity.
Since then, support for these figures has come from a quite different
line of argument. One problem with making these estimates is that
the impacts are something like Nature’s perfect crime, leaving little
or no trace long after the event. The great majority of the bodies
carrying up to several hundred megatons of impact energy break up
in the air. Those which do reach ground produce shallow craters
which soon vanish through erosion and overlaying with sediment.
Merely counting one or two holes in the ground and scaling up is not
a very accurate procedure. The Moon, however, is subject to the
same bombardment history, it has no atmosphere, and very little
erosion. A crater once formed is preserved forever or until such time
as it is buried under the debris from another crater. The American
geologist Shoemaker 127 has carried out a study of small impact
craters on the Moon. The results of this work are shown in figure 19.
His ‘best estimate’ rate shows that, over the past 5,000 years, there
have been:
• about 17 impacts of at least 12 megatons energy
• about 7 impact of at least 30 megatons energy, and
• 1 impact of at least 800 megatons energy.
Figure 19. Baseline rate for impacts of various energies on the
Earth, after E.M. Shoemaker. Based on the size distribution of
small craters on the Moon.
Once again, these are averages. We shall argue presently that the
current impact rate may be substantially higher than this. However
for the moment we shall adopt these as our ‘baseline rates’, and
attempt to evaluate the various cosmic hazards. There are really four
scenarios amalgamated in our opening story: a 20-megaton impact is
mistaken for a nuclear attack; a 200-megaton impact takes place on
an urban area; a 1,000-megaton impact induces a climatic
catastrophe; and the Earth encounters a swarm of missiles.
NUCLEAR ERROR
Of all the risks considered here, this is, in principle, the most easily
countered: one merely has to be aware of it. Given this knowledge,
rational and circumspect men would make no nuclear response. In
the tale then implausible?
There are two main assumptions in the nuclear-error scenario: (1) a
Tunguska event, or a swarm of such events, may be interpreted as a
low-level nuclear attack; and (2) the likely response to such an attack
is an immediate counterstrike. It postulates a vulnerable command
which may be wiped out at any moment, so forcing an urgent
decision to be made on the basis of a complete misreading of the
situation. We shall analyse these assumptions a little more closely.
It might be supposed that with a topic as eschatological as nuclear
warfare, every conceivable eventuality has been explored including
that of a misinterpreted Tunguska-like impact. Whether this is so or
not is not publicly known, the information or lack of it being locked
up in, for example, the SIOP books of the United States. However,
our discussion of impact rates and swarms in the relevant energy
range is based on relatively recent research, and one may ask
whether the politicians and soldiers who have evolved the SIOP
concept over the past 30 years have fully considered the possibility of
such misinterpretation. Some evidence suggesting a lack of
awareness of this possibility is the otherwise comprehensive study by
the Swiss academic Daniel Frei 128 who was commissioned by the
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research to examine the
general question of whether a nuclear war could be started
unintentionally. Frei, in his study published in 1982, examines
nuclear terrorism, the proverbial ‘insane colonel’, accidental launch
due to human or technical failure, organizational breakdown in a
crisis, misperceptions under stress, irrationality of leadership,
misunderstandings due to differing perceptions of strategic doctrine,
and many other possibilities. But nowhere does he consider the
possibility of misunderstood impacts! Thus although we cannot
know, we may suspect that in the first chaotic minutes of the crisis,
the minds of commanders will be preoccupied totally with the Bomb,
not at all with the Swarm. The risk are enormously compounded by
the likelihood that a large impact would threaten the
communications systems used for the command and control of
nuclear weapons. This arises because of electromagnetic effects
which are likely to be caused by the passage of a large moving fireball
through the atmosphere and its explosion near the ground. The
fireball would interfere with radio and radar transmissions by
generating electrons in the ionosphere, create its own radio waves in
the fiery tail, and generate a damaging electrical surge, probably
thousands of volts per metre, in long cables on the ground. The
following effects are tentatively anticipated:
1. Radio propagation from satellites communicating by VHF
would be degraded due to the increased electron density, the
signal failure lasting some tens of minutes over a region perhaps
a thousand miles wide. Those with UHF transmitters would be
blacked out for less time over a smaller area. The ground
receivers, however, would be subject to a damaging electrical
surge.
2. Short-wave radio is the most extensively used system for longrange communication. The radio waves in this range, bouncing
successively off ionosphere and ground, may go round the Earth.
However an increase in electron density will lead to absorption
at these frequencies and so drastically curtail signals. Dumping
even a fraction of a megaton at high altitudes may lead to a
blackout persisting for several hours over a region more than a
thousand miles across.
3. Medium-wave radio is less useful for communications and a
significant increase in the D-layer electron density would render
them almost useless.
4. Submarine communications are carried out by way of VLF
radio waves, which may be 1-10 kilometres long. The D layer
acts as a mirror to such waves, which are reflected off its
underside and can travel for thousands of miles, guided between
D layer and ground. Surprisingly, even these may be affected by
a high altitude fireball, D-layer changes causing mutual
interference between waves bouncing from the ground and from
the sky. Because of their great range, the effect could be
important even three thousand miles from a very large fireball.
5. Systems requiring long communication lines (for example, the
2,000 miles between Washington and the North Dakota silos)
and solid-state circuits (for example computers) would be
vulnerable within perhaps a thousand miles of a large impact.
There is a reasonable prospect, then, that coming in with the
devastation of one or more large impacts on a civilized area, there
will be widespread and immediate breakdown of radio, radar,
telephone, some satellite communications, and computers. A fewhundred-megaton impact on Nevada would affect communications
over the whole of the United States, and probably over Canada and
Mexico also. It should be emphasized that there are many large
uncertainties in predicting the electromagnetic effects of a swarm or
even a single large collision. Nevertheless in the present state of
knowledge it seems that the first assumption in the nuclear error
scenario is not unreasonable: the impact(s) would closely resemble a
number of simultaneous ground and air bursts over one or more
target areas, in appearance, damage and electromagnetic effects.
Assume then, that in the panic of the moment the National
Command Authority believes that nuclear weapons have been
exploded on a low-level target in the USA (an assumption more likely
to hold during a period of tension). It is likely that, in spite of
widespread and immediate disruption, there are surviving channels
of communication, and that within minutes of the impact an
overwhelming flood of information will start to come in, possibly
faster than it can be dealt with. There will be an atmosphere of
intense stress if not panic, shock that the explosions could have
taken place without warning, and an overriding fear that more
bombs may come in at any time. The President or his surrogate will
also be subjected to a babel of advice:
The Pentagon advisors will be clamouring to get the President to
execute ‘their’ particular military option, from a host of ‘instant’
plans drawn up from the information flowing from their pet
warning devices. The President will certainly not be left alone in
the White House Situation Room for a moment’s reflection
before he makes the most important decision of his life. 129
There is in fact considerable doubt amongst experts as to whether a
nuclear war could be handled managerially; that is, the ‘crisis
management’ structure would be beyond the capacity of human
beings to operate in a real situation. For example, the defense expert
Steinbruner 130 considers that great internal conflict would be set up
because of the ‘inherent tension between the imperative to avoid war
and that of controlling the circumstances of initiation if war cannot
be avoided’. We have in fact made this a central decision-making
issue in our story.
Emotional stress is a particular — hazard. There have been many
occasions when leaders have buckled under the strain at critical
moments in war, and no more stressful situation can be imagined
than the one postulated here. Many studies have shown that, beyond
a certain level, the ability of individuals to think through a situation
deteriorates. Misperception may arise through information overflow.
During fastmoving events those at the centre of decisions are
overwhelmed by floods of reports compounded of ‘conjecture,
knowledge, hope and worry’. In coping with the flood there is a
tendency to ‘omission, error, queuing, and filtering’. Under stress
reality becomes distorted; new evidence is looked at with the eye of
preconception; adversaries are seen in stereotyped form; there is a
tendency to jump to conclusions; a loss of perspective; a searching
for scapegoats; exaggerating the positive sides of a decision and
minimizing the negative; and so on — in all at least seventeen
psychological effects of severe stress have been identified.
Stress affects groups as well as individuals. The need for quick action
contracts the group to a very few, enhancing the problem of
information overload. ‘Groupthink’ emerges strongly in a crisis —
there is no time for dissenters and experts outside the small circle;
there is an illusion of invulnerability; collective rationalization; a
failure to look at alternatives; a failure to rethink in the light of new
data; a failure to balance risks properly. What Frei and Christian call
‘the dangers of cognitive distortion’ are exacerbated by the
complexity and sophistication of modern strategic doctrines. Like
Steinbruner, they question whether the decision makers, ‘in the
hectic situation of a crisis emergency, will still be capable of deciding
and acting fully according to the requirements of the complex logic of
strategy ... one may ask whether they are also in a position to
understand all the contingency plans flexible and varied options
offered by today’s nuclear arsenal’.
None of this gives one boundless confidence that good decisions will
be made in the chaos of the moment. For example the apparently
idiotic suggestion made by one of our fictional characters, that
pointless targets were chosen so as not to justify the risk of
retaliation and yet act as a ‘keep our’ warning in relation to some
major military incursion, is in fact a well-recognized war scenario,
the ‘called bluff, discussed by Frei and others. In the stressful, countdown atmosphere of the Situation Room, and lacking recognition of
the astronomical alternative, the suggestion might not seem so
strange.
If there is time to ponder, and if unacceptable risks are not
imminent, a ‘surprise attack’ ought not to lead to accidental war. If
however the issue at stake is seen to be a vital matter such as the
imminent loss of nuclear control, command and communications,
then:
Although many authors assume a particularly cautious and
sober behavior in this type of situation, the findings of
comparative research on international crises ... do not give many
reasons for optimism. There is always a grave risk of suboptimal
behavior. What this means in practice is easy to realize:
miscalculation, false perceptions, and all sorts of inappropriate
reactions.
The second assumption of the story, then, appears to be defensible.
Would a limited nuclear exchange remain limited? This question
have been the subject of much discussion and literature, the upshot
of which is that nobody knows. On the one hand historical precedent
might lead one to suppose that in a no-win situation even a modicum
of rationality would immediately bring a mistaken exchange to a halt.
On the one hand, once triggered, the nuclear-exchange situation
seems to be uniquely unstable. Certainly the idea of limited nuclear
war was always been rejected in Soviet Circles, the late L. Brezhnev,
for example, stating that ‘if nuclear war breaks out in Europe or
elsewhere, it will necessarily and unavoidably become universal’.
Pringe and Arkin, in their study of SIOP (single integrated
operational plan), conclude that ‘In the present SIOP only one choice
before the President is still convincing. That choice is the Major
Attack Option’. And Steinbruner considers that if war appeared
unavoidable, military commanders would put irresistible pressure on
political leaders to get missiles away whatever prior policy may have
been. It seems that the Secretary’s controlled response’ carries the
risk of uncontrolled escalation.
Between them, the USA and USSR occupy about one-seventeenth of
the surface area of the Earth. The number of targets which could be
termed ‘strategic’ in each territory is probably several thousand.
Siberia, for example, is now dotted with new cities and industrial
complexes. If a single missile of Tunguska proportions or greater
now brings in with it the risk of ‘nuclear error’, then a story like the
one above may be enacted once every three or four thousand years.
For a male in a western society, the probability of this event
happening within his lifetime is not too different from say the
probability that he will die of lung cancer. It is interesting to compare
this with the other nuclear risks which Frei and Christian, rather
boldly, tried to quantify. They estimated the probabilities that a
major nuclear war would be launched within five years, under
‘normal’ conditions, due to the following factors:
assuming that, given the impact(s), the risk of misinterpretation and
counterstrike is high. The risk that nuclear war would be accidentally
triggered through one or more large impacts would seem on this
evidence to be at the level of about 2 percent within a lifetime.
There are, of course, very large uncertainties in all these estimates,
and the object of the scenario is not to put forward a particular view
so much as to draw attention to what seems to be a largely
unrecognized hazard. It may be more likely than not that a huge
impact or even a swarm would immediately be recognized as such.
And even if not, perhaps calm and rational minds would prevail in
the minutes following catastrophe. But we should at least be aware of
the risk. As Frei and Christian put it, there are ‘monumental gaps of
knowledge which have to be filled by speculation. Yet, as this
speculation pertains to deadly risks, it would certainly be unwise to
dismiss the more ‘pessimistic’ conclusions our of hand. Dangers
which are conceivable in principle are also possible in practice’.
Once the problem is recognized, the cure is, in principle, achievable
by a mere technical fix, an extra layer inserted into the decisionmaking structure. Technical solutions for the larger impact hazards,
however, are less easily found.
URBAN IMPACT
Let us adopt the ‘random-impact’ picture in which the possibility of
bunched impacts is neglected, and take the conservative ‘baseline’
rate of one impact on Earth, of 10 megatons energy or greater, per
200 years. There is then an expectation of about 25 such impacts
over 5,000 years, about 7 of which are on land. Cities of more than a
million inhabitants presently occupy about 500,000 square
kilometers (surprisingly, missile silo fields take up about half this
area). A direct hit on a city will occur, then, with only 2.5 percent
probability over 5,000 years or, within a human lifetime, with only
about 0.03 percent probability. These are reassuringly small figures.
However, inhabited areas occupy much more space than cities alone.
The present world population density is only about 10 per square
kilometer but of course varies from nil for the ocean surface, to 80
for western Europe and about 400 per square kilometer for say the
UK and Netherlands. Of course, the city concentrations are much
higher, Manhattan having about 25,000 people to the square
kilometre for example. Furthermore these population densities are
increasing rapidly. Whereas 2,000 years ago the human population
of the Earth was about 250 million, by 1963 it was three billion,
fifteen years later (1978) it was 4.1 billion, and predictions for AD
2000 range from 4.5 to 7.6 billion (the United Nations official
forecast being 6.7 billion).
For an impact on a fairly average town-and-country population
numbering 100 inhabitants to the square kilometre, about a million
people would be within 30 miles of ground zero. It is likely that a
Tunguska impact would promptly kill most of them: the damage
done to central Belgium as described in the opening scenario was
based on simple extrapolation of nuclear weapons studies. With the
figures adopted, such an urban impact is expected two or three times
within 5,000 years or, within a human lifetime, with about 3 percent
probability. These are still reassuringly small rates although we shall
see that they may have to be revised substantially upwards in the
light of various factors. However, when we come to impacts with
energies around a thousand megatons, a different story emerges.
COSMIC SWARMS
The Earth and lunar cratering rates are in rough agreement.
However, these rates are averages; they tell us nothing about the
present-day impact hazard, and they might conceal brief periods
when the impact rate was enhanced, perhaps enormously so. Scaling
up from a few Earth craters effectively programs swarms out of the
calculation. The situation for the lunar cratering is even worse, since
the computed yield is an average taken over the age of the lunar
surface, about 4 billion years.
There are in fact indications that the population of interplanetary
bodies generally is currently much higher than the cratering record
indicates. For example the arrival rate of small bodies which burn up
in the atmosphere is 10-100 times higher than one would expect
from the crater production rate. This estimate is possible because
over the last twenty years Continent-wide networks of all-sky
cameras, covering almost a million square miles of sky, have been
recording meteoric events. One of the largest fireballs measured over
this period had half a megaton of kinetic energy and burned up over
the South Atlantic. This is about 25 times the explosive energy of the
Hiroshima bomb and illustrates that the upper atmosphere shields
us from most impacts in this Tow energy’ range. The protection does
not extend above a few megatons. This high fireball rate is consistent
with the general overabundance of meteoroids in the inner planetary
system, as manifested, for example, by the Stohl stream, and with the
fact that Apollo asteroids appear to be several, possibly many, times
overabundant in relation to the lunar cratering.
However, even the modern fireball rate tells us nothing about the
prospect of a swarm of Tunguska-like missiles: one might as well try
to infer the occurrence of a fireball storm from an average night’s
meteor observing. Over and above any temporary enhancement of
the ‘baseline’ impact probability, say over the last few thousand
years, there is the evidence for strong bunching of impacts, such as
the 1975 lunar-impact event, when for a few days the Moon was
bombarded at several hundred times the background rate, and the
occasional mention of daytime fireball swarms by the Chinese
chroniclers. To proceed, we have to consider not only what factors
might enhance the impact hazard overall but also what might cause
impacts to bunch briefly in time. That is, we need to apply a realistic
astronomical model. It is at this stage that an understanding of our
Galactic and Solar System environments becomes crucial.
From the Sun’s current position in the Galaxy it is clear that the
impact rate at the present time must be exceptionally high. If Earth
history is episodic due to passage through spiral arms, then the Sun’s
position at the inner edge of the Orion spiral arm ensures that we are
currently in an active phase. Further, the Solar System has just
passed through the plane of the Galaxy, where the tidal stresses
acting on the comet cloud are at their maximum; the comet flux is
therefore near a strong peak of its galactic cycle. It has also recently
passed through Gould’s Belt and is therefore undergoing an
exceptional tidal stress due to a recent passage through an old,
disintegrating molecular cloud. Specifically, although the detailed
modeling is uncertain, there is good evidence that only a few million
years ago the Sun passed through the Scorpio-Centaurus association,
a group of young, hot blue stars and massive nebulae belonging to
the Gould’s Belt complex. This encounter must have created a sharp
impact episode, within which we are still immersed, most of the
flooding of the Solar System taking place within a few million years
of the encounter.
Evidently then, the Solar System is currently in a very noisy galactic
neighbourhood: we are in an impact episode now, just past the peak
of a strong galactic cycle, whose effect has been enhanced by a recent
disturbance due to passage through a massive nebula. Conservatively
speaking, it is likely that the impact rate over the past two or three
million years has been several times higher than one might expect
just by looking at the lunar craters. This is consistent with the
evidence on the ground in the form of recent impact craters and
recently disturbed geology. It is also consistent with the fact that the
current population of Earth-crossing asteroids would yield too high
an impact rate on the Moon to be consistent with the observed
number of craters.
Even within a bombardment episode however, giant comets are
around for say only 10 percent of the time. Overall, a giant comet
may therefore orbit within the inner Solar System for only a few
percent or so of the time. At one extreme then, it these great bodies
are the prime suppliers of missiles, the impact rate averaged over the
last 50,000 years say could be as much as a hundred times the rate
averaged over the history of the Earth.
If that situation pertains now a number of interesting consequences
follow. Adopting our baseline rate, an impact like the Giordano
Bruno one would take place on Earth once in 200,000 years; within
the timescale of civilization, there is then only a 2.5 percent
probability that such a collision would have occurred on Earth or
Moon. However with a rate momentarily 100 times higher, the
probability becomes 92 percent. Far from being a remote statistical
fluke, the lunar impact of AD 1178 becomes a not unreasonable
expectation. This enormously enhanced risk, persisting for only a few
tens of thousands of years, would not greatly affect the long-term
average impact rate as deduced from the lunar cratering.
It also follows that Tunguska-like impacts occurring at a hundred
times their long-term average rate would yield a current average rate
of one impact every other year. These would not in fact occur every
other year, but would rather be confined to those brief periods when
the Earth intersected the orbit of the comet; further, should the
creation of boulders take place by the disintegration of large bodies,
Tunguska-sized boulders would then exist, temporarily, in swarms,
and impacts would occur primarily when the Earth encountered a
swarm. The hazard would be greatest at one or two particular times
of the year, for a period of few centuries, interspersed with calm
periods lasting for a millennium or so. Thus there would be many
years when nothing happened, and one year when the Earth was
intensely bombarded over a few days or hours.
The detailed profile of swarm encounters is determined by factors
such as the rate at which the orbits of the debris precess in space, the
thickness of the ‘meteor’ stream, the mass distribution of boulders
and so on. Suppose, for example, that the impact rate is currently ten
times above the lunar average, and is concentrated in brief bursts
when Earth and swarm intersect. Then one finds that a full-blown
cosmic swarm would be expected about once in 5,000 years and
would comprise an impact of at least 10,000 megatons energy, half a
dozen impacts of at least 1,000 megatons, 40 of at least 100
megatons and 250 impacts of at least 10 megatons energy. Our
opening scenario is a good deal more modest than this.
That such encounters could happen is not to say that they would
happen: the argument so far is one of consistency rather than proof.
What physical factors might in reality cause boulders to concentrate
in swarms rather than, say, be spread uniformly throughout the
inner planetary system? A picture is emerging of cometary asteroids
as rapidly disintegrating, short-lived balls of dust loosely held
together by a ‘glue’ of ice; this ‘dustball’ constitution applies too to
many meteor particles of probable cometary origin. As heat
percolates into the interior, the body becomes more fragmented until
it is unable to hold itself together against any small collision.
Development of cracks and fissures is likely throughout the interior
as the asteroid weakens; in the presence of slight inhomogeneities
such cracks may penetrate 100 metres into the body, and may lead to
disintegration of some comets into may fragments of this size at the
end of their active lives.
It is likely too that these boulders and cometary asteroids are
shortlived. The outgassing observed from the kilometre-sized object
Oljato is such that it would last only about 100,000 years before
vanishing altogether. A body of similar structure and size 0.1
kilometre, capable of yielding a 50-megaton impact, would last only
5,000 years. There is scarcely time therefore for at least the smaller
asteroids to spread away from the Taurid stream before wholesale
disintegration is under way; small bodies are therefore likely to be
concentrated in the Encke stream. Swarms such as the lunar one may
exist for only a few centuries before they disperse along the orbit and
it is likely that there exists, within the Taurid stream, an
undiscovered asteroid in process of breaking up. It could be up to 30
kilometres across and still have escaped detection. It could also be
the prime hazard facing civilization.
In summary, there are many factors which make it likely that
devastating impacts are bunched into brief periods of high risk
interspersed with longer quiet periods. Tunguska-sized impacts must
follow the galactic trend of the large crater-forming ones, so creating
periods of high and low risk depending on the galactic environment;
within an impact episode the risk is higher if there is a giant comet
around, and higher again on those occasions when its orbit intersects
that of the Earth; and if large boulders do form in swarms, then
during close encounters with the comet or its degassed remnant
there is a risk of occasional bombardment on a scale comparable
with that of a nuclear war.
Under these circumstances, of course, a re-examination of the
mythological and early historical data becomes that much more
critical. Even at the conservative baseline impact rate, Tunguskas
strike on average every few centuries; 5 or 6 such isolated impacts
should have taken place since the time of Christ, with an excellent
chance that one of them had an energy of several hundred megatons.
The occurrence of Tunguska-like impacts in recorded history is
therefore expected. In fact, with the temporarily enhanced Tunguska
flux implied by the incidence of giant comets and the production of
swarms, one can only avoid a sequence of virtually annual impacts
(not observed!) by having long periods of quiescence interspersed
with brief periods of multiple bombardment. Thus we expect a Dark
Age within the last two thousand years. Probably, we had a very near
miss at the beginning of the present millennium. The future is
equally secure.
COSMIC WINTER
In our scenario we assumed that above a certain energy threshold, so
much dust is lofted into the atmosphere that a major climatic
catastrophe follows. It takes surprisingly little energy to produce this
effect. The application of only 100 megatons or so of energy with 100
percent efficiency would lift enough fine dust from ground level into
the stratosphere to block out sunlight altogether for as long as the
dust remained. A large explosion in which some correspondingly
smaller fraction of the energy went into lofting dust, or multiple
explosions, would therefore have the same effect. This incidentally is
a major difficulty with the simple ‘dust blocks sunlight’ thesis of the ‘
giant meteorite kills dinosaur’ school. Brief stratospheric dusting
must have happened many hundreds of times throughout the history
of life and cannot therefore be a prime cause of the mass extinction
of the dinosaurs. Prolonged dusting from cometary breakup, coupled
with worldwide conflagration and blast from cosmic swarms which
may include huge asteroids, are another matter. We examine here
the relationship between cosmic dust input and climatic disaster.
In 1977, the American astronomer Kowal discovered a faint object
which, although it left a short asteroid-like trail on a photographic
plate, did not lie in the asteroid belt. Kowal’s object (now named
Chiron after one of the Centaurs known for his wisdom and
goodness) turned out later to be a huge comet in a chaotic, unstable
orbit between Saturn and Uranus. Analysis of the orbit shows that
the comet passes close to these planets from time to time, having had
a close encounter with Saturn in the seventeenth century. During
such strong encounters the course of the comet cannot be predicted
with accuracy and its orbital history is not well known. Statistical
predictions can be made, however, and it turns out that the mean
lifetime of Chiron in its present orbit is about 100,000 years,
although it could persist for a much longer or much shorter time.
When the comet is eventually expelled from this zone, there is a 20
percent probability that it will be thrown into interstellar space, and
an 80 percent probability that it will be thrown into the region of the
inner planets.
Now 100,000 years is a very brief span in relation to the age of the
Solar System (4.5 billion years) and even when it was discovered, it
was thought most unlikely that we were seeing a satellite newly flung
out from the Saturnian system, or an escaping main-belt asteroid.
Thus there are only about a dozen asteroids larger than Chiron,
which is 250 kilometres in diameter, and the probability that we
should be observing one in the act of escaping was very remote. The
chaotic orbit, and recent discovery of a coma indicate however that
we are dealing with a comet. On the other hand, with Chiron a
comet, it is a truly exceptional body, with something like a hundred
times the mass of the comet Encke progenitor, and an 80 percent
probability of finding itself in a short-period orbit within 100,000
years. Such an enormous body, disintegrating into dust and asteroids
over some thousands of years, would be an awesome sight. But also,
it could hardly fail to create a severe climatic trauma — probably an
ice age — and a great mass extinction of life would then be
unavoidable. It is probably rather fortuitous that Chiron has gone
undiscovered for as long as it has, and there are probably not too
many Chiron-sized objects waiting in the wings, but a very large
population of smaller bodies could well exist, undetected, in the
Saturn-Uranus region. Because of our complete ignorance of the size
of this population, the hazard is hard to assess and is best judged on
the rate at which new comets seem to be entering the short-period
population at the present time. A large uncertainty goes with the
resulting estimate. But it seems that, on a timescale of 500 years,
there is about a 1 percent risk that another comet, sufficiently large
to pose a major threat to civilization, will enter into an Apollo or
short-period orbit. The hazard posed by a fresh giant comet entering
the Earth’s environment is therefore reassuringly small. A much
more immediate dust hazard, we shall see, is that posed by the
cometry debris already here.
The largest single impact discussed in our story was 1,500 megatons.
Even taking an average impact rate say as found from the lunar
cratering, thus ignoring the evidence that we are now in a period of
enhanced risk, there is a reasonable prospect of such an impact over
historical timescales. An impact of this energy would result from a
body of mass about 13 million tons coming in at 30 kilometres per
second. The atmosphere would ablate an outer skin from the body
but would be quite unable to stop the bulk of it hitting the ground.
Given the fragile and fluffy composition of cometary material and the
energy of the impact, the bolide would immediately disintegrate, any
part of it going unvaporized being broken into its constituent
interstellar dust particles, which may be about 0.15 microns in
diameter: this material would be entrained in the fireball.
In the event of a land impact, the comet fragment would excavate a
crater. Experience with surface nuclear bursts 131 indicates that
something like a third of a million tons of dust is raised for every
megaton of explosion energy. The figure is probably roughly
applicable to an impact but may be a few times higher because of the
energies involved in an explosion as gigantic as the one we are
considering. In the case of the nuclear explosion, a few percent of
this dust is made up of sub-micron sized particles, much of it formed
by the condensation of vaporized material. To what extent an impact
would be comparable with the nuclear explosion is very uncertain
(the temperatures reached in an impact are lower but persist longer)
and it is not obvious that the nuclear case can be applied unmodified
to the impact one. Limited evidence suggests that, out of the ground,
something like the mass of the projectile will be excavated in the
form of sub-micron particles, and probably several times this
amount is produced as vapour condensates. Overall, perhaps 400-
2,400 million tons of dust may be generated by the collision, 40-240
million tons of which is in the dangerous sub-micron form. All of the
fine material will be entrained in the fireball.
The huge fireball would be too energetic to be contained by the
atmosphere. Laden with dust, it would rise upwards at several
kilometers per second, incidentally creating powerful winds which
themselves sweep up material. Within minutes it would soar to an
altitude of several hundred kilometers, in the high stratosphere.
Here it stabilizes, and the dust spills outwards.
Closer to the ground, the intense heat of impact would generate fires
over a wide area. About 40 percent of the land surface is forestcovered, and the same again is brushwood, grass and so on. About
one-third of the area of the USA is flammable in the summer, for
example. A 1,500-megaton impact on a forested region would
probably create several hundred fires over an area of 400,000 square
kilometers. Depending on cloud cover (clouds might enhance the
heat through reflecting the radiation), dryness of the ground and so
on, it is possible that these would merge into a single forest fire about
800 kilometres (500 miles) across. Everything combustible along the
line of sight of the initial fireball would catch fire and the extent of
the conflagration would be limited essentially by the curvature of the
horizon. (Prompt loss of life over this area would presumably be
considerable.) Adopting figures which have been used to analyze the
‘nuclear winter’ scenario, one finds that something like 40-50 million
tons of smoke would be produced, the smoke particles having
diameters about 0.1 micron. Plumes of smoke would rise up to 10
kilometres (7 miles) into the atmosphere.
The situation we have described — some tens of millions of tons of
sub-micron dust lofted into the high stratosphere, and similar mass
of smoke pouring into the lower atmosphere, is very similar to that
envisaged in the nuclear winter studies, in which the after-effects of
smoke and dust from a nuclear exchange, ranging from 100 to
10,000 megatons, are considered. This is a fortiori true if the Earth
encounters a cosmic swarm. The general similarity is not surprising,
given that both situations involve the sudden release of comparable
amounts of energy. There are, however, significant differences:
1. Some tens of millions of tons of the comet material is in the
form of fragile, sub-micron sized particles ready made for
separation and lofting upwards.
2. A single large impact throws a greater proportion of material,
higher into the stratosphere, than an equivalent number of
smaller explosions.
3. An impact fireball differs in several ways form a nuclear one;
it is not clear what effect this has on estimates of dust
production.
4. Nuclear war scenarios envisage urban targets with high
concentrations of flammable material; a random impact is more
likely to strike forest or brush.
It should be emphasized again that great uncertainties attend all
these attempts to calculate the dust injection, mainly because of the
absence of trials in the field. Arguments have been given for both
higher and lower dust inputs in the nuclear winter case. Overriding
such uncertainties is the certainly that impacts of vastly greater
energy will take place from time to time. From time to time,
therefore, Nature will generate its own nuclear winter. Overall it
seems likely that during a period of a few thousand years, there is an
expectation of an impact, possibly occurring as part of a swarm of
material, sufficiently powerful to plunge us into a dark age.
The consideration is that if, as we propose, ancient tales are a valid
guide to events in the prehistoric past, then some mention of a
climatic glitch should be preserved in the tales of celestial battle. In
fact they are, and they are preserved in localities which might be
expected to have suffered most from brief, sudden coolings. Myths
from Iranian highlands and the central Asian Altai tell of a golden
age which was terminated by a life-destroying cold. In Icelandic
myth, for example, one finds the fimbulvetr, a terrible winter
associated with Ragnarok, the final battle of the gods. In this
prophesy of world-end, based apparently on a story lost in time,
familiar elements appear: there is the terrible battle of the gods,
Odin, Thor and others, accompanied by blazing hosts — the
Valkyries, the ‘children of darkness, the doom-bringers, offspring of
monsters’, the sons of Muspell etc. The world ash Yggdrasil, about
which the sky rotates, trembles, while:
Earth sinks in the sea, the sun turns black.
Cast down from Heaven are the hot stars.
Fumes reek, into flames burst.
The sky itself is scorched with fire
and so on. The world ends with snows and terrible winds, or three
winters without a summer depending on the source, and there is
reference also to an earthquake coupled with the fimbulvetr. It may
be that such tales do indeed provide a record of a minor, aborted
cosmic winter associated with the fireball swarm.
When the dust finally clears, would the climate return to normal?
Consider the following sequence of events: suppose, first, that the
freezing after an impact is such that large areas of the planet remain
snow-covered throughout a summer. With the onset of winter, this
snow cover thickens. By the following summer, with dust still
suspended in the stratosphere in middle and high latitudes, the snow
is too thick to melt; in the following winter it is added to and so on.
When eventually, the dust clears, the land masses of the northern
hemisphere are covered in a snowfield which, reflecting sunlight
back into space, has become permanent. The snowfield is added to
each year until, within a millennium or two, Europe and North
America are again covered in ice sheets a kilometre thick, the ocean
level has dropped by 50 or 100 metres, and the Earth is locked into a
new ice age. Quite a small lowering of temperature, say about 2° or
3° C for some years, would at the present day be enough to cover
much of northern Canada, especially Baffin Island (over 1,000 miles
long), with permanent snow. This in turn would create a cold trough,
triggering further cooling and snow over Quebec province to the
south (which is largely a high plateau), leading down to the region of
New York and the Great Lakes. Once such a feedback got going, it is
difficult to see what could stop it.
Whether a new ice age could be triggered by a super-Tunguska
impact, acting singly or as part of a swarm, we do not know.
Simulation of the mechanism is very complicated because of the
many unknowns, and few studies of the problem have been carried
out. It turns out that much depends on the amount of sea ice which
would form, and where it would drift to. But the movement of the sea
ice depends on prevailing winds and sub-surface ocean currents,
each of which would themselves be strongly affected by the cooling.
Penetration of this ice into middle latitudes would extend cold
atmospheric troughs southwards, further enhancing the cold in these
latitudes. The amount of sunlight reflected back into space from
snow-covered forests is another uncertain factor. High latitude cloud
cover — another unknown — must also play its part. It is not
surprising, given all the uncertainties, that the few mathematical
studies which have been carried out on the problem have given
widely different answers. To the question, could a super-Tunguska
impact bigger plunge the Earth into a new ice age, the only secure
answer at present is that we do not know.
We anticipate nevertheless that over and above ice ages, brief
episodes of glacial severity will occur at intervals of a few thousand
years throughout the few million years of a bombardment episode.
These episodes will be marked by abruptness of onset (years rather
than millennia). Recovery may well be slowed down by feedback
effects. Possibly, even, the Earth will not recover at all, and will be
suddenly plunged into an ice age. We should look for these cosmic
winters, brief but traumatic coolings between the great glaciations, in
the geological record.
They are, in fact, there. In 1972 Dansgaard and his
colleagues 132 pointed out that the oxygen isotope ‘thermometer’ of
the last 125,000 years reveals a number of brief, but sudden and
drastic, coolings. These are seen in figure 20. These authors,
referring to the event of 90,000 years ago, state that ‘within 100 yr
the climate changed from warmer than today into full glacial severity
... the drop (in temperature) might have occurred almost
instantaneously ... it took 1,000 yr to recover from this catastrophic
event.’ The temperature drop involved may have been 5-8° C. The
same authors also claim that the ending of the last glaciations 10,700
years ago may have come with similar remarkable abruptness,
perhaps within 20 years, coinciding with a sharp decline in the
concentration of dust in the glacial ice. There may well have been
more such events, since anything of less than about 100 years’
duration is liable to be missed altogether in the oxygen isotope
record. For example the record covering the last 10,000 years looks
quite innocuous, but history tells us otherwise.
Figure 20. An early temperature record of the last major
glaciations, after Dansgaard and his colleagues, from a study of
cores extracted from the Greenland ice cap. According to the
theory described here, this is essentially a record of
stratospheric dusting due to material from the progressively
disintegrating Comet Encke progenitor. Note the rapid
flickering, the suddenness of onset of individual ‘flickers’, each a
cosmic winter, and the rapidity with which the ice age ended.
These sudden changes are not consistent with slow orbital and
polar variations as the prime movers, but are expected on the
giant comet picture.
Fossil pollen provides a record of the prevailing type of vegetation,
and hence the climate, in a given locality. In the southern Vosges in
France there is a peat bog, the Grande Pile, which yields undisturbed
layers of sedimentation laid down, 5 years to a millimetre, since
before the last ice age. The palaeobotanist Woillard 133 found that
every interglacial period which she studied in detail ended abruptly;
that is, each glacial episode was sudden in onset. The earliest of these
‘cold snaps’ is shown in detail in figure 21. Over a period of about 150
years there is a steady cooling and then, suddenly, the temperate
forest of the region — oak, alder and fir trees — is replaced by pine,
birch and spruce, sub-Arctic forest found nowadays in the north of
Scandinavia. This happened within twenty years. However because
the growth time of trees is of this order, the actual transition of
climate may have taken place much more rapidly and could, in fact,
have been nearly instantaneous. The mean temperature drop over
the northern hemisphere was probably about 5° C. similar results
have been obtained by others, looking at other slices of time.
Figure 21. Fossil pollen record in a European peat bog, after G.
Woillard. Time moves from right to left and a 300-year period is
covered. The extreme left of the record shows a sudden but
lasting change in forest composition, from predominatly fir to a
colder birch and pine. This sudden cooling of the European
climate might have been caused by a stratospheric dusting, from
impact or meteoric dust, causing a climatic instability and a
change in ocean circulation patterns.
The geological evidence then, seems to agree reasonably well with
the astronomical expectations: at intervals of a few thousand years
(sometimes more and sometimes less) the planet is abruptly plunged
into a glacial climate which may last for a few, a hundred or
thousand years, or which may even lock the Earth into an ice age,
from which only slow orbital changes would free it.
What would happen if there were a brief blockage of sunlight, lasting
even for the few months or years it would take micron-sized dust
particles to settle out of the stratosphere? This question has been
asked in a nuclear war context, but the results of the climatic and
biological studies are probably roughly applicable to the present
situation. An important difference is that, whereas in the nuclearwar situation smoke might be scavenged out from the lower
atmosphere in a few weeks, in the cosmic case the stratospheric dust
would linger. Based on these studies, it seems that a significant
cosmic encounter, enough to reduce sunlight to a few percent of its
normal value, would precipitate a rapid plunge to sub freezing
temperatures (say - 30° C or colder) in continental regions.
Freshwater rivers and lakes would freeze over. With the extreme cold
would come storms of unprecedented intensity, especially near
continental edges. It would be difficult to see even by day, and
photosynthesis would come to a halt. The dust raised by one or more
large impacts, even if initially confined to one hemisphere, would
within a few months spread to the other, and soon the effects would
be global. The effect on ecosystems would depend on the time of
year. An encounter in the summer, corresponding both to the
growing season and to passage through the Beta Taurids, would wipe
out commercial agirculture for the rest of that year. Thus a drop of
only 2° to 5° C in the northern hemisphere — no more than one
observes in the pollen record — would substantially cut wheat and
corn production, and might wipe out rice production in Asia. In this
situation much of the human race would be wiped out too, and one
would not expect civilization to recover for, probably, centuries. A
full-blown ice age would of course end civilization in any form we
now recognize.
There is a well-known theory, associated with the Yugoslavian Earth
scientist M. Milankovitch, according to which ice ages are caused by
slow cyclic changes in the Earth’s orbit. These changes cause the
amount of solar energy reaching the land masses of the northern
hemisphere to vary. It is likely that orbital evolution does indeed
affect the strength of glaciations, but unlikely that it is the prime
cause. The cyclic variations have been going on continuously
throughout Earth history but the ice ages are intermittent. Some
additional factor must have triggered the onset of the last ice age, for
example. And of course the sudden coolings, usually only years in
onset, cannot be explained by orbital cycles which are measured in
tens of thousand of years. Looking at figure 20, one may ask why the
planet recovered from some abrupt coolings, but not from others. It
is likely that, during a comet shower, impacts are continually dusting
the Earth, in combination with comet dust. But it is only when the
orbital conditions are right that the runaway instability sets in, and
the Earth ices over. Calculations show that these orbital conditions
exist now.
COSMIC DUST
There is a crucial test for the ideas developed here. 134 If Encke’s
Comet in its giant phase truly flooded the stratosphere with dust,
then that dust should still be identifiable in deposits on Earth. An
ideal place to look for the comet dust would be deep within the polar
ice caps. Snow falling in these regions becomes compacted into ice,
which is laid down typically at a few centimeters a year, and once
deposited, is likely to remain undisturbed for the lifetime of the ice
cap. Dust, trickling down from above, will become entrained in the
ice. We should look for comet dust, laid down in quantities large
enough to block out the Sun, and identifiable with the material of
Encke’s Comet.
Now ice cores, some of them over a kilometre deep, have been
extracted from several locations — Byrd Station at the south pole,
Camp Century in the north of Greenland, and so on. It has been
known for some years that there is an excess concentration of very
small particles, many of them sub-micron sized, laid down during
the last ice age (figure 22). Over the period around 20,000 to 10,000
BC, during the most recent ice age, the dust concentration seems to
be at least ten times higher than the post-ice-age levels. In fact, so
much dust was laid down over this period that, if indeed it entered
through the high stratosphere, the sky would have been densely
veiled, polar sunlight being reduced to a fraction of its present-day
level. Of course the effect of a permanent dust veil in the atmosphere
is more extreme in polar regions, where the Sun is never very high
above the horizon and sunlight has a long path to traverse through
the atmosphere. The dust concentration is about that expected on
the comet disintegration hypothesis.
Figure 22. Typical depositions of sub-micron dust particles in
polar regions during glacial and post-glacial times (due to
Thompson and Mosley-Thompson, ‘Microparticle concentration
variations’). Note the enhanced dust levels during the last ice
age. A significant proportion of this material seems to be
cometary in origin.
There is, however, a hidden assumption in this line of argument. It
could be that snow was precipitated at a different rate during the last
ice age. If the annual snowfall at the poles was only a tenth of its
present rate, then a steady background trickle of dust would become
concentrated in the ice without, however, ever having been
concentrated in the atmosphere. Fortunately, there are annual
variations in the dust concentration, and these can be counted, much
like counting tree rings, to give an absolute chronology. These counts
show that the timescale shown in the figure is about right. Evidence
covering the last 20,000 years, then, seems to show that the polar
caps at least were unusually dusty places. Some proportion of this
material must be volcanic in origin and some must be wind-blown
continental dust (it is likely that the polar regions were windier
places than they are now). However the deposition rates at opposite
ends of the Earth are surprisingly close, although the distribution of
land masses in the two hemispheres is very different.
In an investigation carried out in 1983, the American LaViolette
analysed samples of ice from the Camp Century ice core. The
technique used, neutron-activation analysis, allows certain elements
to be detected in parts per billion. High iridium levels were found in
all the samples examined: we are dealing, probably, with cosmic
dust. The levels corresponded to deposition rates 10 to 60 times
greater than those of the present day. LaViolette found also that the
dust had a very unusual chemical composition; and at particular
levels in the ice, the over-abundances of several elements jumped by
large amounts. At one level the concentration of tin jumped by over
27,000 times and silver by over 200 times. It is very unlikely that
this is ordinary meteoritic material since there appeared to be
particles hundreds of times richer in tin, antimony, silver and gold
than ordinary meteorites. It is very unlikely too that this material
came from Earth: for example the tin is over 100,000 times more
concentrated than the ordinary material of the Earth’s crust.
LaViolette pointed out that ‘If this material is of extraterrestrial
origin, its source must be different from that of the majority of
meteoritic material.’
If this is material from Encke’s Comet, and if a fragment of that
comet struck the Central Siberian Plateau in 1908, then any
surviving cosmic material from the impact site ought to have the
same strange chemical composition as the stuff laid down in the ice
caps between ten and twenty thousand years ago. No visible debris
was left after that collision. However, under the pressure of the
fireball and the subsequent fallout, Tunguska material was
impregnated into the peat moss of the area. The Russian Golenetskii
and his colleagues have recovered such material and investigated its
chemical composition. Their technique was to extract peat cores
from the central regions of the impact site, dry them and burn them
in a furnace in contamination-free conditions. The final step was a
theoretical one, in which an attempt was made to allow for the
preferential escape of more volatile elements under the intense heat
of the fireball: this last step is the most uncertain, but should give
results at least roughly correct. The pre-entry composition of the
Tunguska body, it turns out, shows many peculiarities according to
Soviet investigators: ‘the content of many elements in it differs from
their average abundances in the earth’s crust, meteorites, and the
solar system as a whole’. In particular, there were great overabundances of tin, silver and antimony.
Figure 23. (a) Nickel-iridium ration for small dust particles laid
down on Greenland over the period 19,700-14,200 BP (filled
circles), and from microparticles found at the site of the
Tunguska explosion of AD 1908. Both these elements are found
in cosmic particles. The good fit of both sources on to the line
may imply a common progenitor body, as anticipated from the
theory, (b) Comparison of abundances of various elements form
the Greenland ice particles and from the Tunguska particles.
Material in the box had the ‘universal composition’ found in
unprocessed astronomical bodies. Both dust deposits have
identical anomalies relative to the mix — large overabundances
of tin (Sn), silver (Ag), Caesium (Cs) and antimony (Sb) — again
consistent with a common source, and hence a cometary origin
of the Greenland dust.
Putting these two studies together, we find the results shown in
figure 23. There are caveats. Only trace amounts of elements are
being measured, and even with the greatest care contamination of
samples is possible: the problem has plagued polar research for the
past twenty years. Further, the pre-fireball composition of the
Tunguska object had to be inferred from the surviving remnants.
However it would be very strange if all these effects had conspired to
yield identical fictitious anomalies, and we are therefore inclined,
pending further measures, to accept the results. The conclusion is
remarkable: within the errors, the dust extracted from 10,000-yearold ice a kilometre down in the Greenland ice cap, and that extracted
from the moss of the 1908 Siberian impact, have the same exotic
chemistry. One should keep in mind too that each analysis was
carried out without knowledge of the other, and without knowledge
of the astronomical picture we have described. The identity of result
supports the hypothesis that the last ice age was caused by dust from
a large comet whose debris is still in orbit. We conclude that an
encounter with the denser parts of this debris is possible and could
have consequences along the lines discussed in our story.
SUMMARY OF RISK ASSESSMENT
There are three main reasons why the magnitude of the cosmic
impact hazard has not been appreciated until now. First, the average
impact rate in the 10-10,000 megaton range has in the past been
underestimated by a factor of about ten. Second, only the local
effects arising from blast have been contemplated. Third, there is the
new consideration that the impacts may be strongly bunched in time,
on various scales from the geological downwards, so leading to
periods of high risk interspersing low risk. Arguments have been
given to indicate that we are currently in a higher-than-average risk
period. Our ‘best estimates’ of the cosmic hazard are then as follows:
1. The environment of the Earth is substantially more hazardous
than has been realized until now. Several risks — nuclear error,
urban impact, stratospheric dusting — have been identified.
2. These risks are measured at an average level of a few per cent
within a human lifetime, but in reality they may be concentrated
into brief catastrophic periods in which multiple impacts occur.
3. Especially given the sensitivity of modern agricultural systems
to temperature and the arrival of the Beta Taurids in the
northern hemisphere growing season, the prospect of global
catastrophe from stratospheric dusting appears to be the
greatest natural hazard. 135
4. These hazards are substantial when considered on the
timescale of human civilization: should they materialize,
civilization might be plunged into a new Dark Age, and it is even
possible that the human race would come to an end.