
2 — Forces of Evil
It is in the nature of things that bodies of knowledge tend to be
slotted into models, or theoretical pictures of reality. It often
happens that new facts come along which do not fit perfectly into old
ideas, but in practice small modifications to the overall structure
usually ensure that it remains intact. It occasionally happens,
however, that inconsistent facts so accumulate that they cannot be
accommodated within an existing framework; things then break
down, and sometimes it is necessary to have a full-scale revolution in
thinking. In this situation old facts remain valid but they are
understood in a quite different way, with new patterns of thought. To
the participants, truth itself often seems to do a somersault although,
of course, it does not: it is simply the perception of the truth that is
being discarded. 22
It is, however, difficult to judge when an accumulation of cracks in a
structure can be repaired, and when they are signaling that collapse
is imminent. Indeed, scientific reputations are made and lost on such
judgments. It is easy in retrospect to marvel at establishment
obtuseness, but a given situation is rarely clear-cut at the time, and
for every successful scientific revolution there are many more which
fail or never get off the ground. But if truth often advances in this
fitful way, it must follow that erroneous models of reality are held for
periods of time which may be quite long, before the weight of
evidence destroys them.
It also follows that there may well be ideas which are widely or
universally held to be true today, which are in fact false. There are
many historical precedents — geocentrism and Biblical creationism
are two familiar examples — which show that humanity is perfectly
capable of holding on to the wrong preconceived model for
thousands of years: human reasoning on its own is very fallible and
experience shows that it is liable to go more and more astray unless it
is continually checked against new observations or experiments. It is,
then, usually new evidence which eventually destroys erroneous
preconceptions; but when this happens, the old evidence too has to
be re-thought.
A revolution is under way in the Earth sciences. Terrestrial
catastrophism, the idea that the evolution of life and even
fundamental geological processes are controlled by sudden inputs of
material from space, has become an important if controversial
concept in these fields within the last few years (see chapters 14 and
15). The evidence is partly in the rocks, but it also derives in large
part from new astronomical observations. The standard view
advocated for a century or more by experts in geology and biology,
that the Earth evolves in splendid isolation from its surroundings, is
proving to be wrong. What we are doing in this book is taking the
same astronomical discoveries and applying them to timescales of
historical rather than geological interest. That is, we show how the
same astronomical evidence which is now leading to new insights in
the earth sciences also tells us that cataracts of fire must have taken
place within the last few thousand years. We consider how historical
evidence is better fitted to this new catastrophist framework.
The reader must not be deceived, however. We also deal in this book
with matters at the boundary of human knowledge and which, for
one reason or another, are accepted as understood within a quite
different framework. Cataracts of fire, if contemplated at all by the
expert, are considered to be absurd. The question we are inviting the
reader to consider therefore is whether the facts are already beyond
the level where the standard point of view can still absorb them. The
Babylonians, for example, have told us quite plainly that they were
afraid of things in the sky and, as we have seen, they described what
they observed in terms that leave little doubt as to the appearance of
the danger they perceived. And yet, the modern interpreter elects to
discount this knowledge, believing that what was observed must have
been imagined. We shall argue indeed that this is not the only
instance and that large bodies of written evidence are now ignored or
cursorily dismissed because they do not fit into a preconceived
twentieth-century framework, which was, after all, constructed
before the new discoveries in Earth science and the new
astronomical evidence came along. Indeed, given our opening story,
there is another dimension to the discussion: can the all-toocommon scholarly approach, of holding on to cherished views by the
fingernails until forced off by the sheer weight of evidence, be
morally justified? What justification can there be for sustaining an
unshakeable conviction that may put civilization at risk?
Between seven and five thousand years ago, our planet was
experiencing a relatively benign climate. The condition seem to have
played some part in causing communities in several different areas of
Asia and North Africa to evolve the first urban economies (figure 1).
Thus by 3000 BC, rather similar great civilizations outside China had
emerged on the alluvial soils of three major river systems: the TigrisEuphrates in Mesopotamia, the Nile in Egypt and along the Indus
Valley in an area that corresponds to much of modern Pakistan. The
advance of these civilizations evidently depended in part on the
production of sufficient food to support not only the section of the
population involved in such work but also the specialist classes
engaged in craft industries and administration. The necessary
surplus was apparently achieved through the transfer of farming
practice in the highland zones to the alluvial plains of these
particularly extensive river valleys which could be exploited, through
irrigation, to produce high crop yields.
Around 3000 BC however, and lasting for about two centuries, the
terrestrial climate deteriorated quite markedly on a global
scale. 23 Rainfall increased and the average temperature declined.
The northernmost tree-line in Canada and Northern Europe for
example fell back several hundred miles (figure 2); and this in spite
of the proliferation of forests elsewhere. Mountain glaciers increased
their range. During this period, too, major flooding occurred in
Mesopotamia and Egypt; the former evident in the silt excavated
beneath ancient citadels and the latter revealed by the location of
temples relative to the fluctuating Nile. Elsewhere large-scale
changes in vegetation and ground cover were taking place, including
those brought on by extensive forest fires supposedly due to
clearances undertaken in a period of presumed agricultural
prosperity. 24 It is a paradox of any global climatic recession that
whilst some areas experience a worsening of general conditions,
others may enjoy an amelioration of the environment. 25 In general
though, we can be sure there was change: for some a turn for the
better, for others, a period of prolonged strife.
Figure 2. Mean summer temperatures (global average relative to
its present day value) based on the movements of the Arctic
treeline during the last 7,000 years (reproduced from The Little
Ice Age by J. Grove). The sustained amelioration during the
period 6000-1500 BC corresponds to the recognized climatic
optimum of the Holocene period, whilst the broken lines
indicate possible brief ameliorations due to a reduced incidence
of atmospheric dust veils, as indicated by acidity peaks in
Greenland ice cores and frosted tree rings.
Remarkably, the same epoch brings clear evidence of a surge in
civilization; new skills, the appearance of writing and the
establishment of a professional class, all coinciding essentially with
the start of the historical era. Moreover it may be inferred from the
various new state enterprises that were undertaken after this time,
for example the construction of pyramids and the implementation of
large irrigation schemes, that the population was motivated beyond
any previous expectation. Judgements of what was required and
levels of application in human effort emerged that completely
transcended earlier practice.
The question naturally arises whether these dramatic developments
had anything to do with the change of climate. We shall ask also
whether the pace could have been set by an unexpected
overpowering force, related to the change in climate, which
simultaneously created a sense of urgency and no little
apprehension.
Neither of these lines of research seems to have been seriously
pursued by modern archaeologists and historians. Most of these
experts assume we are dealing with a coincidence and that the
physical change of climate around 3000 BC could at best have had
only a minor influence on the advance of civilization. A century ago,
in the aftermath of the industrial revolution, indeed before the
physical evidence of climate change was known, it seemed natural to
explain the parallel rise of the great ‘hydraulic empires’ in terms of
the diffusion of knowledge and lucky breaks in practical know-how.
Prehistory was therefore envisaged as a succession of more advanced
technological states stone, bronze, iron and so on — each phase
gaining more leisure wherein to plan subsequent more rapid
advances of mankind. Something of the influence of Darwin’s theory
of evolution can be seen in this way of looking at prehistory.
However the scheme of never-ending technological evolution, so
alluring to the nineteenth- and twentieth-century mind, began to
look rather vulnerable when it was realized that some Europeans
were extracting and processing copper well before the fourth
millennium BC. It was clear then to the experts that if the idea of
evolution was not to be abandoned, technology would have to
become something of an incidental theme. The notion emerged
therefore that separate communities would evolve in parallel because
of some innate natural law of human behavior. Given similar initial
conditions, it was assumed, communities would develop similar
internal ‘socio-economic pressures’ driving them to similar states of
civilization. Such pressure would cause mankind to advance from a
primitive state of savagery through nomadic pastoralism and
barbarism to settled agriculture and mature civilization. The same
pressures would gather homesteads into villages, merge villages into
city states, cause urban civilizations to grow and monolingual
empires to spread, until the species inherited the Earth. The replaced
by the sociological ones of the mid-twentieth. 26
A line of thinking has developed therefore in which it now seems
most natural to subordinate the ultimate course of history to man’s
civilizing urge. By following the technological fashions of the
nineteenth century and the sociological ones of the twentieth, in fact,
the archaeologist and the historian may have contrived to keep
environmental factors at bay. If one studies the Wessex culture of
Early Bronze Age Britain, for example, it may be to discover whether
it arose locally during trade with the continent, or whether it was
imposed by continental invaders on a subject population. The answer
provides insight perhaps into the processes by which different races
of people gain dominance over one another and advance the fate of
nations. But by attaching importance to such patterns in human
behavior as may then emerge, and regarding them as an end in
themselves, without introducing any allowance for the differing
physical circumstances and changes of environment, there is always
the risk of imposing patterns on the course of history that bear no
relation to its underlying motivation. Sociological formulae are
rather limited in their scope therefore. Indeed, if information is
limited, and this is usually the case, the issues are often intractable
and virtually impossible to resolve. Nevertheless, if it seems there is
no other course to follow, the programme of enquiry may continue to
be justified to the exclusion of others. The result is that one learns
only very slowly, if at all, whether a productive line of enquiry is
being pursued. In the present instance, therefore, it may be asked
whether archaeologists and historians have committed themselves to
a line of enquiry that is potentially interminable. With such a
restrictive programme, apparently self-imposed, it seems there may
be only a slender chance of returning to the fundamental issue at
stake: that is, whether the symptoms of civilization, man’s
technological and sociological feats, the rise and fall of nations,
reflect the incidence of some deeper historical force.
To get back to this question, however, we are bound to study what
the ancients themselves said. So far we have simply considered the
state of the Mesopotamian mind and the activities of astrologers
several millennia ago, but perhaps one of the most surprising aspects
of all that went on is the significance of the role the ancients attach to
gods. In Egypt also, at the start of the third millennium BC, people
were attributing their welfare and misfortune to divine beings of
comparatively recent provenance. It behooves us, perhaps, to see
now whether anything more can be learned about these gods. One
might imagine, for example, in view of the climatic changes at the
time, that purely symbolic ‘weather gods’ were invented as a
convenient mode of expression and that these subsequently got out
of hand! However this would certainly be to understate the
enormous scope of the gods in Egyptian eyes, even if it were tolerable
on other grounds.
Thus it was from about 3000 BC onwards that the dynastic pharaohs
took for granted their infusion of godly power derived from an
ancestral deity. 27 And with divine names like Scorpion, Catfish,
Fighter, Serpent and Killer, for example, it is hardly to be doubted
that the early kings looked upon their gods as quite a bellicose
bunch. Eventually, the feudal sparring between Egyptian chieftains
gave way to a more omnipotent pharaoh and a more regal style of
existence. Horns, a falcon-god, became the sky-god associated par
excellence with kingship: essentially a benevolent figure, he provided
security and continuity going back to the very foundation of the new
Egyptian state. It is no denial, of course, of any contribution of
climatic change to possible conditions of strife if we follow the
Egyptians themselves awhile and scrutinize carefully the role of
Horns, whom they took to be their accepted savior.
The multifarious nature of Egyptian mythology arises from the fact
that different city-states claimed the special protection of different
gods. With the amalgamation of cities, the god of one city was liable
to be identified with the god of another. It was customary however
for each god to have its own family and relations, many of them
being in animal form, while in due course, the more significant ones
tended to become humanized. Despite immediate impression,
therefore, the Egyptians have analogues of the divine shepherd with
his sheep, and the mythologies have a monotheistic flavor from a
very early stage: the single, very remote god Ptah is one such
example associated with generations of subsequent deities.
According to the earliest cosmic legends, Osiris and Seth were firstgeneration paternal gods of considerable importance. Respectively
black and red skinned, they also brought into existence ‘two lands’.
These lands, Blackland and Redland, were apparently the two main
areas of a supposedly huge flat world. The contemporary
geographical world centred on Egypt seems moreover to have been
incorporated into Blackland, the latter being bounded by a
continuous enclosure which separated it from Redland. This
enclosure, constructed by Osiris, clearly lay in the cosmic real
however since it also marked the zodiacal path of the celestial barque
in which the Sun-god and a further complement of sky gods made
their daily journey.
It was implicit therefore in this early Egyptian conception of the
world that the flat Earth was more or less continuous with a flat
cosmos. Egyptian temples were even modeled on the arrangement,
the enclosure being represented by a rectangular colonnade and wall
whose interior face was decorated with a waving stream surmounted
by a starry sky. The enclosure was in fact synonymous with a river or
stream whilst Redland beyond, literally outside, was frequently
indentified as an ocean or sea. Thus, another aspect of the imagery
connected with Blackland and Redland was their supposed
transformation from or emergence out of the primordial waters of
chaos, which were also in some sense associated with the birth of
Osiris and Seth.
Within the enclosure and at one end was the so-called Island of
Creation, the possible repository of a meteoritic stone, as at Mecca,
whilst at the other, on either side of the main entrance, were two
huge pylons, a representation of features which were apparently
thought to extend out of the cosmic enclosure into cosmic space, in
an arrangement which seems to have been sufficiently part of the
accepted scheme of things to have been later subsumed in places of
worship as pairs of towers or minarets. This is an important aspect of
cosmic structure to which we shall return at a later stage. For the
moment, we simply note that Osiris was believed to have been
murdered by Seth who then dismembered his body and distributed
its parts around the enclosure. Isis, the devoted sister and wife of
Osiris, was later responsible for putting her husband’s body together
again, and thus resurrected, posthumously conceiving a child by him.
The child, Horns, was raised to manhood by his mother and
eventually avenged his father’s death by repeatedly defeating Seth in
battle.
To the Egyptians, especially during the Middle Kingdom, this
recurring conflict epitomized past and future triumphs of the forces
of good over the forces of evil, and they clearly identified Horus as
the lord and protector of Egypt. Implicitly, there was an
understanding that the forces of evil might sometimes make
incursions into the territory belonging to the forces of good under
Homs’s protection, and there are references throughout Egyptian
history to threats from these foreign peoples of the Sea. The collapse
of the Middle Kingdom (c. 1650 BC) may indeed be directly
attributable to their influence. We read for example of ‘a blast from
God’ which left Egypt in a state of ‘dire affliction’ without a sovereign
upon the throne. ‘Rulers of foreign lands’ called the Hyksos then took
over the country, apparently without a struggle, burning the cities
and the temples of God. They were said to have Seth as their god and
they are definitely presented as barbarians and ruthless overlords,
though archaeologists and historians can find little or no material
evidence from the period of their rule to support such a claim. To
this day, there is no physical indication of invaders from any country
with which the Hyksos may be identified. It seems they may as well
have brought brief destruction from the sky! Seen in this light, Horus
and Seth and their cosmic setting do not seem unreasonable and one
can understand perhaps why they should have been of such lasting
significance for Egyptian life. We are led to conclude that the cosmic
menace in the Mesopotamian sky, whatever it was, was observed in
Egypt as well.
Indeed, wherever one looks in the contemporary ancient world, one
comes across creation myths 28 referring to celestial giants who
engaged one another in battle and who once dominated the
terrestrial scene. This battle was likewise a recurring one which
usually ended in victory by the forces of good. The victory over Seth
by Horus has its counterpart for example in the defeat of the ancient
Babylonian Tiamat by Marduk, the Greek Cyclops by Titans amongst
whom Zeus was eventually to be regarded as the most prominent, the
conquest of the Hebrew Behemoth by Leviathan, the contest with of
the Hebrew Behemoth by Leviathan, the contest with the Dragon
that ended in victory for St. George and the overcoming of Satan by
Yahweh, to name but a few (see table 1). No more than a cursory
examination of these ancient myths is necessary to show that the
forces of evil always had strong celestial overtones (see chapter 13),
so the Mesopotamian civilization was far from being alone in its
intense fear of the sky. Indeed it is difficult to escape the impression
that specific agencies were present in the ancient sky one of which
was seen as a potential threat to man whilst the other seems
eventually to have been regarded as a saviour. The question that has
to be resolved therefore is whether there is any material basis for a
dualism in the sky, one aspect plainly harmless and the other a
clearly perceived danger.
It is characteristic of the recurrent conflict that the forces of evil
eventually succumb to the forces of good, and in those cases
where no father-figure is clearly identified, it is possible that a
very ancient name has been preserved in that of the later
benevolent force.
It is interesting to note for example that Osiris is shown in ancient
illustrations wearing a long white cloak. He is said by the Egyptians
to have brought with him the inspiration for civilization and
agriculture. Eventually however, he lost his former glory and died,
though his rejuvenated spirit was said to have survived and lived in
his successor. Each pharaoh, symbolized by Horus during life, thus
became Osiris on death. The desert by Osiris into the underworld
followed by his journey to the Place of Ascension, otherwise the
Island of Creation, was symbolized by a formal procession leading to
the final resting place, a pyramid, the latter in some sense
representing a heavenly abode as real as the cosmic enclosure
separating Blackland from Redland. Obviously there is a problem in
identifying where symbolism ends and reality begins but one may
speculate whether a regularly revealed object in the sky with the
appearance of a long white cloak can break up and lose its former
glory whilst building in space a temporary island and a temporary
closed path from outside which the Earth may continue to be
menaced.
In this connection, it is clearly important to note that the traditions
relating to Typhon in Greek myth, who corresponds to Seth, the
opponent of Osiris in battle, also have rather definite cosmic
connections. Typhoon is specifically referred to as a kind of comet by
several classical authorities and in the first century after Christ,
Plutarch 29 wrote:
as for the dimmed and shattered power of Typhon, though it is
at its last gasp and in its final death-throes, the Egyptians sill
appease and soothe it with certain feasts of offerings. Yet again,
every now and then, at certain festivals they humiliate it
dreadfully and treat it most despitefully — even to rolling
redskinned men in the mud and driving an ass over a precipice
(as the Koptos folk) — because Typhon was bom with his skin
red and ass-like.
The red, ass-like skin of a dimmed and shattered god seems
distinctly obscure to the twentieth-century mind, and one might seek
to dismiss it as an incomprehensible piece of symbolism. However
we shall anticipate later discussion (chapter 12) by noting that as a
description of a once-great but near-defunct comet it is entirely
appropriate.
Naturally, if such happenings were observed in the sky, one can
appreciate why ancient myths from all over the world, especially
those with a cosmological flavor, should have acquired similar
underlying themes and many details in common. Furthermore, if the
happenings were responsible in some way for assaults on the Earth
by cataracts of fire leading to the breakdown of law and order, we can
expect some overall coherence in the pattern of world history: we can
expect the simultaneous collapse of empires, populations on the
move at much the same time, conflicts to be forced and new ideas to
emerge, dominated perhaps by a deep fear of what the sky has in
store. This, strangely, is the pattern of world history (e.g. see table 2)
and many a scholarly reputation has crumbled already in the search
for its underlying cause. One cannot, of course, immediately presume
on this basis that an interaction of the kind under discussion must
therefore have happened. What we can say, however, is that the
evidence is more consistent with the proposition than we might
otherwise have been disposed to believe. To the extent that cataracts
of fire of cometary origin may have been a general source of terror in
the past and it is natural to expect ritual responses that would then
be preserved by desperate people seeking to appease apparently
uncontrollable cosmic forces, we can also expect that the orbital
characteristics of any particular comet involved might be reflected in
very ancient social practices which have by this time lost their
meaning. Fire festivals for example, involving bonfires, processions
with blazing torches, tumbling burning wheels down hills, hurling
lighted discs into the air and many other variations on similar
themes, are in fact commonplace throughout the world and it is
significant that these tend to occur most often during early
November (Hallowe’en) and mid-June, the beginning of the former
month being also commonly regarded in the past as the start of the
calendar year. Whilst neither date has any conspicuous agricultural
significance and the former bears no obvious relationship to the
seasonal location of the Sun, there is a definite association between
these times of the year and intersections by the Earth with the orbit
of a particularly significant comet. We will return to this comet in the
pages that follow (e.g. chapter 13) but for the moment, we again note
connections which are more direct than we might otherwise have
been disposed to believe.
Table 2 (opposite): The climate of the last 10,000 years appears
to be divided by relatively sharp global recessions (sheded) into
distinct periods (sub-atlantic etc.) whose offering average
conditions correlate with the frequency of meteoric inputs (x) in
the range of sub-cometary mass. Thus it may be that the most
intense meteoric inputs correspond with little ice-ages (not all
shown), capable in some instances of generating a dark age.
Microscopic carbon particles and charred plants are detected in
basal layers of peat laid down during the most conspicuous
climatic recessions (*) and are due to extensive forest fires, often
remote from civilization, suggesting an extreme natural cause
(see text) rather then human activity (commonly assumed). The
overall pattern of civilization’s development is certainly more
complex than the table suggests but climatic recessions,
characterized by glacial advance, ocean fall, lowered tree-lines,
peat formation and floral as well as faunal change, including
human migration, appear also to be associated with higher
degress of human deprivation and conflict from which new
national groupings emerge to forge new empires: the arrows
reflect general advances through city-states, nationstates and
empire to a world civilization which is not generally achieved.
Coupled with these developments are changing cosmological
paradigms reflecting the perceived significance of meteoric (M)
and planetary (P) phenomena as well as the level of danger
induced by the astronomical environment. The simple sketch of
the evolution of British civilization in the final column relates to
the discussion in chapter 7.
Mythology and ancient ritual then, whether Egyptian, Mesopotamian
or of some other source not considered here, point rather strongly to
a persistent conflict with and within the ancient sky. Modern
interpreters, historians and archaeologists, have nearly always
chosen to give the evidence a figurative interpretation, believing the
references to deities can only be symbolic. We shall not argue the
matter any further for the moment; nations and empires have
declined in modern times for reasons which are clearly more political
than cosmic, so there is no question of a unique one-to-one
relationship. Our purpose at this stage is simply to demonstrate that
there are reasonable grounds for doubt.
But if the alternative picture is correct, the periods of stability in
history which normally capture our attention lose something of their
significance. It is the times when nations fall into chaos and ruin that
mark the real turning points in civilization. Between crises, we might
expect a semblance of order even if it takes a century or two to
achieve, whilst a threat from the sky, even over a decade and even if
it never materializes, may be sufficient to cause a delicately balanced
social equilibrium to be lost for ever. Egyptian history, for example,
is characterized by periods of warring city states and lack of central
cohesion, even amounting to chaos and dark age, out of which there
arose long periods of stability dominated by powerful, magnificent
and generally stable kingdoms. These kingdoms, closely paralleled by
periods of high civilization in Mesopotamia (table 3), appear to have
collapsed suddenly in circumstances that are indeed not properly
understood, each time initiating a new period. The approximate
dates for the start of these periods, based on conventional
chronology, are 3100, 2200, 1650 and 1250 BC. 30 The first
corresponds to the close of the prehistoric era, the second to the
close of the Old Kingdom, the third when the Middle Kingdom was
abruptly terminated by the arrival of the Hyksos invaders, and the
fourth in the interregnum years following Ramese 11 when Egypt
temporarily succumbed to attacks by the Sea-Peoples. Though
civilization then continued in reduced circumstances, the collapse in
this final instance was apparently so devastating that Egypt never
again succeeded in attaining its former glory. It was collapse that did
not go unrecognized elsewhere.
The cultural highspots in the development of Egyptian and
Mesopotamian civilization are apparently correlated, though it
also has to be kept in mind that the chronology, being largely
geared to Manetho’s Egyptian king-lists and the insecurely
calibrated Sothic calendar, is probably only approximate.