
3 — The Heraclids
It was not just in the valleys and deltas of great rivers like the Tigris
and the Euphrates, or the Indus and the Nile that civilization first
took an upward turn. The great urban civilization coming at the start
of the third millennium BC may have been the most conspicuous but
further to the west, the inhabitants of the Aegean were also shaking
off their Stone Age ways. Less impressive at first perhaps but no less
accomplished, these people were also to reach a high level of artistic
and technological achievement and by the beginning of the second
millennium BC the Minoan civilization, centred on the island of
Crete, had not only developed commercial and cultural links with the
other great civilizations but had established itself as the dominant
influence in the Mediterranean basin.
Relatively little is known of the Minoan contacts in other directions
at this time, though Indo-European settlers penetrating from the
north and east were already reaching the nearby Greek mainland. It
used to be thought that these settlers spoke the same Aryan language
from which are descended the Latin, Sanskrit, Celtic and Teutonic
tongues, but the evidence indicates only that by 1600 BC, these
settlers had combined with the population already present and had
laid the foundations for a new Greek-speaking Mycenean culture on
the mainland in a state of seemingly peaceful co-existence with their
more powerful Minoan neighbours to the south across the sea.
The Greeks of classical antiquity 31 are indeed believed to have been
drawn from two sources, representing something of a balance
between an earlier indigenous population, which may have spoken a
Semitic language, and an immigrant wave of peoples, from lands to
the north and east, who spoke languages belonging to the IndoEuropean family. Legend seems to point to two ancient provinces of
Greece, Achaea and Doris, where immigrant and earlier Aegean
stocks were apparently superimposed. However the archaeological
evidence suggests the latter was a comparatively late settlement
around 1100 BC, and there is no indication that it was on any
significant scale. Indeed it is generally accepted now that the
principal Indo-European strain goes back to at least 2000 BC and
that the feeling of racial unity that developed among the loosely
organized groups, living in the narrow valleys between the mountain
ranges and long gulfs which characterize the Greek archipelago,
owed as much to the indigenous maritime people as it did to any
superior warrior-caste invaders. Of course the Indo-European
invaders could have been mainly responsible for the cohesion of the
nation by imposing their feudal, aristocratic ways upon an otherwise
subservient people; but it is also clear now that the Greek language
was of local origin that the sense of nationhood within the population
could equally well be of considerable antiquity.
Thus the version of the Minoan script known as Linear B, which was
used at the Cretan capital Knossos in the final period of its
prosperity, is known to be an early Greek dialect identical with that
current in Mycenean Greece at the time. This seems to indicate that
Greek and Linear B reflect a language that was already fairly
widespread in the Aegean by the mid-second millennium BC. The
apparent predecessor of Linear B, namely Linear A, which was used
during the period of the second Cretan palaces (1800-1625 BC),
Linear A exist alongside the Cretan hieroglyphic script, traditionally
so-called with reference to Egyptian hieroglyphics. Another offshoot
of Linear A, Cypro-Minoan, developed during the sixteenth century
BC though in circumstances which are not altogether clear. The
evidence points, in fact, to a powerful Minoan civilization whose
origins may well go back to the third millennium BC and which was
eventually extinguished towards the close of the second millennium
BC.
The upshot of all this is that archaeologists and historians have been
able to piece together a fairly comprehensible picture of what went
on in the area prior to 1500 BC. The achievement has merely served
to throw into greater relief their increasing bewilderment at the
subsequent course of Minoan and Mycenean history. Lor, in a
relatively short period of time — no more than a few
centuries — despite having reached a very high level of organization
and affluence, both the Minoan and Mycenean civilization
dramatically collapsed. Indeed, they disappeared in what appear to
have been curiously similar though separate circumstances: the
island Minoan civilization, including its Aegean satellite colonies,
around 1450 BC; and the more extensive mainland Mycenean
dominion around 1200 BC.
It has been suggested that the Minoan civilization may have been
destroyed by the Bronze Age eruption of the volcano on the island of
Thera less than a hundred miles north of Crete, and the southernmost of the Cyclades. This was indeed a major event. Volcanic ash
was scattered over a wide area of the eastern Mediterranean
including the Cyclades and most of Crete: we can gain some idea of
its violence from a comparison of Thera’s caldera with that of
Krakatoa. The latter is six times smaller yet in 1883, the
corresponding explosion sent a huge tsunami through the narrow
straits between Java and Sumatra drowning 36,000 people and
destroying at least two hundred villages. However the topographies
differ in each case, and there is no certainty that the Thera explosion
brought the Minoan civilization to a close: the latter continued
beyond the radiocarbon date of Thera (around 1500 BC) and seems
to have disappeared under quite separate circumstances.
Although the relative dating leading to this conclusion, based on
pottery styles above and below the ash deposits on Thera, is
comparatively secure, it should be kept in mind that the absolute
dating is less certain. The chronological yardstick to which all events
in the ancient Near East are currently synchronized as far as
possible, is the Sothic calendar of ancient Egypt. This is based on a
sprinkling of astronomical observations set in the framework of kinglists which come to us through Manetho. 32 As we shall see, the final
collapse of Bronze Age civilization in the Aegean extended
throughout the Near East and produced a cultural hiatus that may
have lasted for nearly five hundred years. The partitioning of states,
giving rise to dynastic overlap, is therefore possible and remains a
potential source of error in absolute chronology: it seems clear that
we should still keep an open mind as to exactly when the Minoan and
Mycenean empires finally disappeared. 33 However, none of this
makes any difference to the substantiality of the events.
On both occasions, the countryside and the towns appear to have
been devastated. As far as one can tell, the decline in civilization and
the deterioration of the environment were more or less
contemporaneous. Most Mediterranean areas were far more wooded
and fertile during the Bronze Age than they are today; the present
semi-barren state bears witness to a combination of destructive
factors during the period in question involving extensive
deforestation and virtual annihilation of the vegetation cover which
caused the topsoil thereafter to be relentlessly eroded. It is even
likely that the countryside and towns were destroyed on such a vast
scale that many of the inhabitants were obliged to migrate, leaving
only a small remnant after 1100 BC to populate and once again
cultivate the land.
Be that as it may, the city buildings, whether they were the earlier
unprotected palace towns of Crete like Knossos, Phaestos or Gournia,
or the massively fortified citadels of mainland Greece such as Pylos,
Mycenae or Tiryns, were devastated as if by earthquake or fire within
two periods of time which were probably no longer than about fifty
years, leaving the inhabitants on both occasions seriously weakened
and considerably depleted. Despite its extent, which embraced the
whole of Crete, the first of these occasions was probably on a lesser
scale. Indeed, it was the collapse of the Minoan civilization that
apparently provided the Mycenean empire with its principal
opportunity for overseas expansion and for two-and-a-half centuries
subsequently, its hegemony steadily grew until it embraced
settlements as far afield as Egypt, Cyprus, Palestine, Syria, Troy,
Cilicia, Sicily, southern Italy as well as Crete and the Aegean islands.
And yet, in due course, this civilization too was completely
overwhelmed. This time, however, the whole area was left virtually
devoid of culture for the subsequent five hundred years: essentially, a
dark age was created. Very little of the Mycenean civilization
survived and the whole nation evidently fell into a state of poverty,
illiteracy and ignorance. The population was not only severely
depleted, it descended to such a primitive level of existence that the
skills of writing and architecture were no longer practiced, indeed
were largely forgotten. There is a continuous tradition of pottery in
many places however, albeit at a more primitive level, whilst legends
and religious cults clearly also survive. Nevertheless it seems fairly
clear from this evidence that we are dealing with human disasters of
almost unparalleled magnitude, and one is left wondering what
natural or human agency could have influenced events on such a
devastating scale.
Plate 3(a). The actual layout of a Mycenean stronghold around
1250 BC, including the location of the royal megaron or small
central shelter or small central shelter (from In Search of the
Trojan War by M. Wood).
The fascination and enduring interest in the Mycenean catastrophe
obviously lies not only in the fact of a dark age and in the factthat it
was preceded by widespread and apparently terminal
destruction, 34 but in identifying what gave rise to the destruction.
Furthermore, the interest which historians take in the subject is not
purely for the sake of the Mycenean collapse itself. Throughout
history, periods of splendor and strength have been superseded by
depression and rapid collapse, many prosperous and powerful
nations having been wiped away in course of time, for example
China’s warring states, the Mayan civilization and the empire of
Rome; and yet in many of these cases, the causes of the decline
remain equally obscure. As already remarked, it is not known
whether we are dealing with some general rule relating to the
internal evolution of society, which has utopias selfdestructing, or
whether some additional external factor is being overlooked. Any
advance in understanding that relates to a particular downfall may
therefore have an obvious bearing on the general phenomenon and
hence the future of our own civilization. As one might expect, then,
all sorts of possible reasons for the Mycenean collapse have been
explored — crop failure and famine, widespread earthquakes,
massive invasions, proletarian revolution, inter-baronial wars, to
name a few — but although some of these may have played a part,
there is now an increasing impression that something which
transcends normal expectation may have been involved.
At first sight the problem seems more mundane: the Myceneans
apparently recognized and anticipated the forces that led to their
demise. It is a curious fact that, having replaced the Minoans after
1400 BC as the principal maritime-commercial presence in the
Mediterranean, feudal chiefs of the Mycenean nation during their
period of dominance and supreme power became increasingly
preoccupied with securing their defenses at home. There was
evidently some kind of awareness that the nation was coming under
siege since look-outs were posted and defending forces were
frequently mobilized in readiness for potential raiders. This activity
has even been likened to that of the Viking period in Europe two
thousand years later. Thus, although the Mycenean economy
apparently flourished and elaborate palaces were built at Pylos,
Mycenae, Tiryns, Iolkos, Gla, Orchomenos, Thebes and Athens,
many of these edifices were also protected behind massive cyclopean
walls. Attention has been drawn to the simultaneous revival of a
peculiar ancient practice, namely the construction within the walls of
the palace of a small covered enclosure known as a megaron, whose
access was commonly through a low-level anteroom, curiously
reminiscent of a modern air-raid shelter but of unknown purpose
(plate 3(a)). Yet all this preparation was apparently to no avail. For,
by the end of the twelfth century BC or thereabouts, all these
citadels, apart from Athens, had been destroyed and abandoned. To
what force did the classical Greeks attribute the destruction? There is
little uncertainty here: the invaders were called Heraclids?
Plate 3(b). Mycenean stronghold at Tiryns (photo: Peter
Clayton).
The context of the references to the Heraclids does not suggest that a
figurative or metaphorical connotation was intended. Local
rebellions or peasant uprisings following some breakdown in the
economy or failure of crops are not inherently likely explanations
therefore, even supposing the well-armed Mycenean aristocracy at
the height of its powers, and it’s almost impregnable citadels, would
lead one to suspect such an eventuality was reasonable. At the same
time, despite the traditions, the study of archaeological remains from
the end of the Mycenean age has failed to turn up any features which
can be attributed with certainty to invading forces: burial habits for
example and the weaponry employed reveal no significant changes.
Nor are there any linguistic developments which might suggest the
arrival of conquerors. Indeed the evidence, already commented on,
points more to a continuity of development going back to the
incursion of Indo-European speakers since 2000 BC. If the Heraclids
were understood, it seems that they could only have been phantomlike raiders from an unknown northern territory who did not remain
in any of the lands they overran.
In fact the whole of the eastern Mediterranean area (figure 1) was
also overrun and devastated during this period. Not only did the
Mycenean empire collapse, so also did its mighty Anatolian
neighbour, the Hittite empire. In this case, the capital city Hattusas
was engulfed in flames and destroyed as were the other Anatolian
cities such as Troy, Miletus and Tarsus. To the east, so also were the
main cities of the Levant, Alalakh, Carchemish, Qadesh, Qatna,
Ugarit; and in Palestine, many other urban centres were likewise
burned and ruined. So, quite apart from the events in the Aegean, the
prosperity and stability of a far more extended area came to an
abrupt end between 1230 and 1180 BC. The whole of this region
subsequently descended into a period of almost total decline and
comparative isolation whose intensity is truly hard to understand. In
the Aegean the Dark Age lasted into the eighth century BC and in
Anatolia almost as long. In the Levant the decline was less
pronounced but real all the same, whilst in Canaan the old
strongholds were fought over by the Philistines, Armaeans and
Israeleites. In the words of one authority, ‘the evidence is easy to see
in sacked cities, tumbled walls, broken communications,
depopulation and deprivation’. Only Egypt, no less enfeebled for a
while, managed to survive and maintain a semblance of civilization.
Here, there were merely the ‘interregnum years’, so called, some time
prior to 1200 BC. A posthumous summary of events during the reign
of the pharaoh Ramses III (1194-1162) starts with an account of the
preceding period in which it is clear that the breakdown was so
complete that years went uncounted and records were not kept:
The land of Egypt was abandoned and every man was a law to
himself. During many years there was no leader who could
speak for others. Central government lapsed, small officials and
headmen took over the whole land. Any man, great or small,
might kill his neghoubour. In the distress and vaccum that
followed there came a Syrian, a foreigner who set himself up
over the whole land, and men banded together to plunder one
another. They treated the gods no better than men, and cut off
the temple revenues.
Evidently we are dealing with an instance of total economic collapse
and general disaster, leaving society hopelessly exposed to incursions
form outside. But after the recovery had been made, Rameses III still
had to ward off ‘The Great Land and Sea Raids’ between 1190 and
1180 BC.
All at once the Lands were on the move, scattered in war. No
country could stand before their arms. Hatti, Kode, Kizzuwaka,
Carchemish, Arzawa and Alishaya. They were cut off ... They
desolated its people and its land was like that which never came
into being. They were advancing on Egypt while the flame was
prepared before them.
Then later: ‘As for those who came together on the sea, the full flame
was in front of them at the river mouths.’
The Egyptian records therefore supplement and bear out the
archaeological evidence in a remarkable way. They appear to
distinguish three phases in the sequence of events. First there were
the forces armed with a full flame who seem to have been an
undoubted threat. It would not be surprising if these were the
invaders who caused so much damage elsewhere. Then there were
the unwelcome refugees from the devastated lands to the north. Only
later was the pharaoh able to claim that he had succeeded in
overcoming both of these problems; and by implication; the
marauders who totally crushed the Mycenean and Hittite empires
were held at bay by the Egyptians.
Yet, despite the convincing corroboration from the whole of the
Mediterranean area, and the undoubtedly very real destruction,
researchers have so far been quite unable to discover who these
incendiary invaders might have been. The identity of the Heraclids in
modern times has become a complete mystery.