
4 — The Sky Gods
Whatever one would like to imagine the Heraclids signify, there is
little doubt as to what the Greeks themselves, emerging from the
Dark Age, thought. They saw Heraclids as sons of Heracles and the
latter as a god.
At the same time, it also has to be admitted that the Greeks emerged
from the Dark Age rather perplexed over the exact genealogy of the
gods. Even as early as Homer (c. 800 BC) or Hesiod (c. 700 BC) their
heroic myths seem to have derived from a variety of
sources. 35 Indeed different poets, and even the same poet in
different passages, apparently preserve a number of very old
traditions. The ones about Heracles are peculiarly complex; the
elements absorbed into the tales of his exploits include conflicts with
primeval monsters, ambivalence in his own nature since he is prone
to fits of bestial frenzy, and his relationship with death and worldend. From the many adventures of Heracles, twelve came to be
selected as the tasks imposed on him by Eurystheus, the king of
Mycenae, and were depicted for example at Olympia around 560 BC.
It was said that Eurystheus, who was the son of Hera, Queen of
Heaven, feared and envied Heracles, who was the son of Zeus, and
hoped to destroy him by imposing on him twelve impossibly difficult
and dangerous tasks. Heracles however successfully completed the
‘twelve labours’, one of them being against the city of Troy. Six of the
tasks preformed for Eurystheus are located in the Peloponnese and
there is suggestion that the stories were originally about a
buccaneering feudal prince who may perhaps have been a real man.
Such evidence indicates that the earliest Greek stories (prior to 700
BC) inherited elements going back in some form to the period five
hundred years or so earlier when Mycenean warriors were in
contention across the sea. It seems therefore that, by the fifth century
BC, through the pervasive influence of the Olympian cult, notions
had spread throughout Greece which intertwined the exploits of the
gods with those of a few dimly perceived chieftains many centuries
previously. For most Greeks — not all — the Mycenean period even
came to mark the beginning of time itself, whilst Heracles became a
symbol of strength and immortality, the greatest heroic figure of
them all. He more than any other hero bridged the seemingly
impassable gap between the short and fateful life of man and the
unending splendor of the gods.
It was apparently through contacts further east that the early Greeks
first learned to doubt their homegrown wisdom. The Greek historian
Herodotus (484-430 BC) 36 for example, originally form Asia Minor,
remarked that:
In Greece, the youngest of the gods are thought to be Heracles,
Dionysos, and Pan; but in Egypt Pan is very ancient, and once of
the ‘eight gods’ who existed before the rest; Heracles is one of
the ‘twelve’ who appeared later, and Dionysos one of the third
order who were descended from the twelve. I have already
mentioned the length of time which by the Egyptian reckoning
elapsed between the coming of Heracles and the reign of
Amasis; Pan is said to be still more ancient, and even Dionysos,
the youngest of the three, appeared, they say, 15,000 years
before Amasis. They claim to be quite certain of these dates, for
they have always kept a careful written record of the passage of
time. But from the birth of Dionysos, the son of Semele,
daughter of Cadmus, to the present day is a period about 1600
years only; from Heracles, the son of Alcmene, about 900 years;
from Pan the son of Penelope — he is supposed by the Greeks to
be the son of Penelope and Hermes — not more than about 800
years, a shorter time than has elapsed since the Trojan War.
This is a rather confusing cocktail of divine appellations, but we can
put aside Semele, Cadmus, Alemene, Penelope and Hermes, all of
them merely circumstantial details as far as our present purposes are
concerned, and concentrate on Hermes, Dionysos and Pan. It is the
recorded uncertainty over their relationships that is of immediate
interest here, for it reveals to us how an informed traveler was
seeking to improve the rather truncated view of world history that
the Greeks of the fifth century BC still possessed.
Herodotus has been accused of magnifying the wonders and hoary
antiquity of Egypt in order to adorn his own tale, and there have
been suggestions too that his Egyptian informants were not without
some degree of national chauvinism. However, the chronological
sequence described by Herodotus is consistent in itself and does not
contradict what we already know. Amasis, for example, was an
Egyptian pharaoh whose reign may be taken as a relatively secure
marker, since it corresponds to the time, only a century before
Herodotus, when Egypt and Greece were re-establishing regular
contact after the Dark Age. There is evidence that the Egyptians at
this time were considered by the Greeks to be counting in months
rather than years, though it is possible also that the Greeks did not
fully understand the Egyptian reckoning of time based on extant
priest-lists going back to the first dynasty (around 3000 BC).
Probably, therefore, the Egyptian timescale should be reduced by a
factor of twelve or ten, although the exact figure remains unknown.
Be that as it may, Herodotus goes on to make it clear that the popular
Greek view relating to the arrival of the gods was in error and that
Heracles was at least as old as 1800 BC. We should also take note of
the fact that Herodotus sees nothing abstract or symbolic about the
gods: he discusses them as real things, with specific genealogies and
birth dates in a factual historical context.
The Greek view of the gods prior to the fifth century BC was indeed
quite matter-of-fact. The gods were still invested with great power,
moreover, and it was no less the custom in Greece than it had been in
Sumeria and Egypt for feudal chiefs to claim gods as their ancestors
and hence a divine right to rule. But among a people where it had
never been possible for power to be held by a single ruling dynasty,
such claims carried less conviction, and it seems to have been in
Greece that the status of the gods came to be first seriously
questioned. And from these doubts, there emerged a widespread
view, stated by Euhemerus, for example, that the gods must have
originally been real people who were later unscrupulously ennobled
to supernatural status by their devious descendants. On this
reckoning gods were a straightforward invention and the earlier
matter-of-fact view a delusion. Although it could have been that the
only invention was the investment of humans with divine rights, the
idea that the gods were truly real also gradually became less
attractive in the atheistic society that subsequently evolved in
Greece. It hardly seems likely that ideas would have developed in this
particular way if any visible basis for belief in real sky gods had
remained in the sky. Ideas did so evolve however and there is no
reason to be astonished by the matter-of-fact view of the gods
espoused by the early Greeks. It seems likely that the very earliest
Greeks regarded the Heraclids as perfectly real descendants of a
perfectly real Heracles.
Heracles was also given an ancient ancestry in a religious cult
ascribed to the probably mythical Orpheus. 37 Orphism was not at
first widely accepted in Greece but the traditions of its theogony
became well known eventually through the teachings of Pythagoras
(c. 530 BC) and Plato (427-347 BC), having spread along with its
associated mystery religion from Thrace into Greece. The stress in
Orphic doctrine on the division between body and soul, the
immortality of the latter and its possible reincarnation, suggest an
earlier Egyptian connection. The Orphic school is therefore likely to
have been quite ancient and there is some suggestion that it may
even reach back to the fourteenth century BC, having been brought
to the northern Aegean from Egypt by the fugitive priesthood of
Akhenaton (1367-1350 BC).
Apart from its mystic rites, Orphism was noted for its speculations
on the nature and relations of the various gods. One of the gods
belonging to this sect was Aion, of whom it was said that he ‘remains
ever unchanged by virtue of his divine nature, who is one with the
world, who likewise has neither beginning nor middle nor end, who
partakes of no change, who created the whole of divine, living nature.
Aion, according to ancient authority, was born out of Water and
Earth in the form of a snake with two heads, those of a bull and a
lion. Between the heads was the face of a god with wings on its
shoulders. The name of this strange deity was Cronos Ageraos
(unageing time) or Heracles.
In Greek tradition generally, Cronos was a remote primary god who
had originally produced everything, divine or human, out of himself
(plate 4).
Evidently then, there was some confusion over the actual provenance
of Heracles. On the one hand there were those whose beliefs may
have derived from the Egyptians and who saw him as quite ancient.
On the other hand there also existed the view that the world only
began around the time of the Trojan War, in which case Heracles was
considered to be relatively young. Heracles remained an extremely
significant deity on either account however, and we may assume that
the Heraclids were well understood by the Greeks generally to be
awe-inspiring figures, reaching back to the very source of creation
itself. That this should be so is an important clue to the nature of the
destructions.
Plate 4. Heracles. In late Roman times. Heracles was considered
to be identical to Ancient god of Time — Cronos — Aion, the
later being the equivalent of (a) Zervan, a winged god with a
lion’s head, in the Mithraic tradition; and (b) Phanes, a winged
god born of a cosmic egg, in the Orphic tradition. Note that
Zervan stands upon a world globe characterized by two crossed
bards (cf. Figure 3), whilst Phanes stands amidst the twelve
zodiacal signs, indicating that the egg has cosmic significance
(see Van der Waerden, Science Awakening II ). The topmost
constellation in the zodiac here is the Ram Aries (reprinted by
permission of Kluwer, Academic Publishers. Photo: the Bodleian
Library, Oxford).
The Orphic tradition also recounts how a god called Phaethon ran
amok and set fire to the Earth. Homer in fact associates Phaethon
with one of the labours of Heracles and provides a link with the
events surrounding the downfall of Mycenae. The word Phaethon
actually means ‘blazing star’ and it may even been another name for
Zeus, the principal figure of the Greek pantheon. According to the
Roman poet Ovid who wrote much later (around the time of Christ),
the chariot of the Sun was taken over by his son Phaethon who then
allowed it to wander from its course. 38 Phaethon failed to hold the
reins and caused the horses to ‘break loose’ and ‘rush aimlessly,
knocking against the stars set deep in the sky and snatch ... the
chariot along through uncharted ways’. Then:
the earth burst into flame, the highest parts first, and spit into
deep cracks, and its moisture all dried up. The meadows are
burned to white ashes; the trees are consumed, green leaves and
all, and the ripe grain furnishes fuel for its own destruction ...
Great cities perish with their walls, and the vast conflagration
reduces whole nations to ashes.
Apart from the description of processes which appear to have
considerable relevance to events at the close of the Bronze Age, the
reference to horses and ashes is doubly interesting because it is
strangely reminiscent of that story of a wooden horse which, on some
later accounts, specifically caused the downfall of Troy during the
Mycenean decline. This particular course of events was never alluded
to in Homer’s Illiad and the story is generally seen as a post-Iliadic
addition designed to reveal Odysseus as an unscrupulous strategist.
It remains conceivable however that the story is cosmological
symbolism with a basis in fact. The connection between wood and
ash is obvious, as are the cosmic connotations of the Phaethon tale.
The brightly flowing trails of fireballs, and the tails of great comets,
have been associated since antiquity with the manes of
horses. 39 Such visions in the dark sky are known to have always had
terrifying associations, a distant reminder of which lingers on in our
modem word ‘nightmare’. In Arcadia, Poseidon was worshipped as
the master of horses and was widely regarded as the instigator of
earthquakes as well as being the brother of Zeus. Orphic theogony
seems therefore to have an underlying naturalistic character and
reveals potential links between events which may have actually
happened and cosmic mythology. We shall be pursuing this link in
more detail in due course.
This early naturalism — the linking of events on earth with the
actions of the gods — is open to two interpretations, two models of
reality. One can treat the stories with disbelief because, of course,
supernatural intervention in the affairs of the world is absurd. Or one
can take them seriously, the supernatural or divine connotations in
this instance implying not the ghostly and the spiritual, but a
disposition on the part of some real phenomenon to be larger than
life and endowed with capacities beyond human control. It goes
without saying that most commentators in modern times have
selected the first alternative but if we now choose the second, on the
grounds that something real must have been involved in the
destruction of the Mycenean empire, then it will be necessary in due
course to identify with certainty that period, later in history, when
the meaning of divinity changed from the physically real to the
merely figurative. For the moment, let us explore the connotation
denoting realism a little further and see if it is possible to construct a
bridge between the Egyptian and the Greek cosmos. 40
Phaethon’s relationship with the Sun is, in fact, a rather unusual one
for the Greek gods. However, as we have noted, many aspects of the
Orphic tradition are suspected survivals from the fourteenth century
BC when they were first brought to the northern Aegean form Egypt
by members of the priesthood of Akhenaton. The members of this
priesthood adhered to the belief, radical in Egypt, that the Sun is the
All-father. Thus, there is no need to be concerned about the solar
aspect of the Phaethon story since it was generally foreign to the
Egyptian and Greek conception of the Supreme Sky God, at least well
into the first millennium BC. On the other hand, despite
considerable differences, there are also aspects of the Greek and
Egyptian traditions which show surprising agreement, especially
those concerning the way in which the cosmos was made and how it
subsequently evolved. These features in common might have arisen
when contact was established between the two countries after the
Dark Age, a possibility not generally given much credence by
scientific historians; 41 or it might equally be due to a joint awareness
of universal facts.
Both before and after Akhenaton, the Egyptians preserved a
polytheistic tradition; there was however a leading figure amongst
the gods. He was the ultimate source of existence, but He was
definitely not the Sun. Originally this creative power was known
under different names at the various cult centres in Ancient Egypt:
Atum-Re at Heliopolis, Ptah at Memphis, Thoth at Hermopolis and
Khnum at Elephantine. But He was essentially the same Being in all
the cults and recognizably the agreed source of a number of specific
great gods, Osiris, and Seth included, from whom there was believed
to have sprung later a whole host of lesser sky gods as well as living
things and mankind on earth. Indeed according to Memphitic
theology, it was even said to have been through the thought and
word of Ptah that the next generation of gods — the Ennead, which
included the sun god Atum — had been brought forth from the
primeval waters.
In these early Egyptian cosmological speculations, there was
something that can easily be seen as having anticipated later Jewish
and Christian doctrines. For example in the Fourth Gospel version of
Genesis one reads that ‘in the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God’. Furthermore, the emphasis
on gods and men who were fundamentally similar in character and
behavior, as well as having a common origin, anticipated in
considerable detail the cosmogony described much later by Plato. In
Egyptian theology as in Greek therefore, there is little doubt that we
deal with a cosmos in which the actions of gods and men in their
respective domains were thought to be identical, and in which the
relationship between gods and men was such that lives here on earth
were paid of some continuum that embraced life in the sky as well.
Now, in Egyptian cosmology, we have draw a distinction between
‘the world of the Horizon’, namely our flat earth (Geb), and ‘the
world of the Two Lands’ discussed earlier, which emerged from the
primeval waters (Nun) and which seemed to incorporate the Sun’s
path. The latter, which is of course marked in the sky by the
constellations of the zodiac, arched over and under Geb, the regions
of the living (Shu) and dead (Duat) respectively, exposing sections
known as Nut (heaven) and Nannet (counter-heaven). There is a
tendency nowadays to think of heaven as somehow incorporating the
whole of the visible sky but Nut was clearly envisaged by the
Egyptians as a strip or path stretching across the sky in an east-west
plane. It was said to be supported by four pillars from mountains at
the edge of the Earth but there is no evidence that these pillars
corresponded to the cardinal directions; rather it seems the path
simply had dual characteristics, as if it divided into two interwoven
strips. This dualism, associated with Ptah (the ‘Lord of the Two
Lands’) and, as we have seen, Osiris and Seth, is likewise often linked
nowadays with Upper and Lower Egypt but strictly speaking it
relates to upper and lower reaches of the Nile. The Nile was,
strangely, the celestial river of that name, commonly depicted in the
vault of the sky as the goddess Nut, alternatively as an immense cow
with a starspangled belly or as a milky way traversed daily by the Sun
and nightly by the personified stars or gods (Plate 5).
This distinction between the celestial and geographical Niles is one
that both classical and modern commentators tend to be very causal
over but it is one nevertheless that the ancient Egyptian worshipper
was not likely to misunderstand. Thus:
Thou makest the Nile in the lower world and bringest it whither
thou wilt, in order to sustain mankind, even as thou hast made
them ... thou hast put the Nile in the sky, so that it may come
down for them and make waves upon the mountains like the sea,
in order to moisten their fields and townships ... the Nile in the
sky thou appointest for foreign peoples ... whereas the (other)
Nile, it comes from the lower world for (the people) of Egypt. 42
The ‘world of Horizon’, namely our flat earth, and the ‘world of the
Two Lands’ were also not infrequently at odds with one another. The
state of great tension that was considered to exist in Egypt was thus
expressed in terms of the struggle between Horus and Seth on the
one hand and the pharaoh on the other, the latter clearly posing as a
mediator between the unified nation on earth and the divine forces
responsible for cosmic order. The point has already been made that
the divine forces were very real and even brutal so far as the
Egyptians were concerned since it was evidently not taken for
granted that the world was safe. To counter the dangers, the pharaoh
essentially became the stabilizing hub of the nation, uniting it with
the divine influences and controlling agencies of the universe, and
virtually turning into a cosmic figure himself. One can only assume
that the pharaoh, as a mere mortal, knew what he was about and was
able to secure unto himself this degree of omnipotence through
demonstrating a real ability to anticipate and avoid the recognizably
malevolent cosmic forces, whatever they were, either through chance
or skill.
Modern interpreters, of course, have tended to assume that these
malevolent forces were fictional and they therefore picture the
Egyptians as a rather gullible people capable of swallowing every
aspect of a demonstrably false and purely invented cosmology.
However, it is equally plausible, if not more so, to suppose that these
people were much like ourselves and that they may have been caught
up in events that demanded urgent solution and that, as usual, they
deferred to experts who came up with what appeared at the time to
be the most rational explanation of what was going on. If so, it is
understandable that the pharaoh should have employed a
professional priesthood and conferred upon it considerable
privileges and power as well as astronomical duties. And if the
cosmos forever remained beyond their capacity to truly comprehend,
then it is understandable that cosmological theory should have
developed or evolved sometimes perhaps by desperate edict from the
pharaoh.
Plate 5. In the writings of early Greek natural philosophers, the
heavenly path of the Sun was associated with the Milky Way. A
similar personification of the Sun’s path is found in ancient
Egypt where it is represented by (a) the star-spangled cowgoddess Hathor, later Isis (line drawing reproduced by
permission of Weidenfeld & Nicolson), or by the similarly
decorated mother-goddess Nut, not bearing (b) or bearing (c)
the solar barque as the case may be (line drawings reproduced
by permission of Crossroad/Continuum).
In the New Kingdom for example, the city of Thebes rose to
preeminence as the principal sacred city having absorbed various
cosmogonies (Memphite, Heliopolitan and Hermopolitan) and their
respective systems of gods. Its priesthood advanced the worship of
Amon-Re, the body and face respectively of Ptah who controlled and
pervaded the whole universe, together with the heavens and the
underworld. By this time, the concept of a single universal god was
making itself felt more and more, and no great principle would seem
to have been at stake when Akhenaton decided that Atum, the
monotheistic power manifested in the disc of the Sun, should be
exalted as the one and only god. Nevertheless, Tutankhamun
restored the succession under Amon-Re after the death of Akhenaton
and he was said to have ‘driven out the disorder from the Two Lands,
so that order was again established in its place, as at the creation’. It
seems therefore that just around the time the Minoan civilization
was undergoing its decline, radical changes were being introduced by
a new priesthood under Akhenaton which relate to priorities in the
sky. It is by the way that an error was later thought by the Egyptians
to have been committed at this time, though it is evidently important
to know that those responsible for the change incurred the wrath of
the people and subsequently escaped with their ideas to the Northern
Aegean where they seem eventually to have re-emerged as part of the
Orphic doctrine, in which the divine cocktail evidently embraced
some surprisingly naturalistic elements.
When we turn to early Greek cosmology, we find its various facets
closely resemble those of Egyptian cosmology. Thus the earth (Ge
rather than Geb) now appears as a vast plain encircled by a stream
(Ocean) resembling the waters of Nun in Egypt, from which the gods
and mankind had earlier sprung. Likewise, Heaven and Earth were
thought to meet at some points on the extremities of the horizon, at
the so-called pillars of Heracles, the entrance to the underworld
being situated in the west where the Sun descended into the nether
regions whilst the stars arose on the other side. There was also some
idea that Hades, the counterpart of the Egyptian Duat, could be
reached through rifts in the rocks at certain places on the earth’s
surface. The Greeks, like the Egyptians, did not at first consider the
universe and mankind to be transcended by the gods. On the
contrary, the gods shared human weaknesses, passions and
intrigues, and they were generally attributed no higher status than
conquering chieftains.
Somewhere in the background though was the rather remote figure
of Cronos who could be likened to the Egyptian Ptah. The
nineteenthcentury view that Cronos — the Roman Saturn — was
identical with Time (Cronos) has been considered some-what
questionable during the present century; however if Cronos was in
fact a recognizable body in an Earth-crossing orbit of short period,
there is no reason, in principle, why its regular close encounters with
the Earth should not in the past have become the basis of timekeeping in the form of a sacred calendar, with successive years
beginning in November, say, in addition to the one we now associate
with the solar year. Sacred calendars of unknown origin are evident
elsewhere in the ancient world (e.g. Mayan and Indian calendars).
On the face of it, then, there is no compelling reason why Cronos and
Time should not in fact derive from a common source in the very
remote past (see also plate 4).
Be that as it may, it is the creative role of Cronos that we emphasize
here. As with his Egyptian counterpart, a kind of dualism is
apparent. Cronos eventually fathered two band of gods, the horrible
Cyclopes and the rock-hurling Titans, who engaged one another in
battles, leaving the Earth sometimes as the unhappy but innocent
victim. It may be that the mighty Zeus and the very considerable
Poseidon (or Atlas) were the principal contestants here but in due
course, the former alone seems to have inherited the cosmic arena.
Zeus, who was certainly of the same generation as the Titans, and
who is now thought to be identical with the second-millennium
Babylonian God Marduk (see chapter 1), was also the main IndoEuropean sky god and weather god, combining the functions of a
nature god with those of the head of an anthropomorphic pantheon
mostly fathered by himself. From his exalted abode in Mount
Olympus, probably in the sky, this divine ‘cloud gatherer’ poured
refreshing fertilizing rain on earth, but he also blasted gods and men
alike with his terrorizing thunderbolts when they thwarted his
irascible will or frustrated his plans and purposes. Eventually
however, even Zeus became a less anthropomorphic figure and
turned more into a divine cosmic presence exercising his will
through more subtle and invisible means.
It is a difficulty confronting the mythologist that ideas about the
nature of ancient gods did gradually evolve. Nevertheless it is
possible to construct a general correspondence between the
Mesopotamian, Egyptian and Greek theogonies, thereby confirming
their basis in a common source or sequence of events. In the later
versions for example we are aware of variously named remote fatherfigures who eventually came to lose some of their pre-eminence: Anu
in Mesopotamia, Ptah in Egypt and Cronos in Greece. For both sets
of progeny fathered by the latter figures, a kind of dualism involving
an element of conflict was clearly significant, as were the new
dominant figures that emerged, Horus in Egypt, for example, and
Zeus in Greece. By the mid-second millennium BC however, the
supposed backdrop of events justifying the pre-eminence of these
gods was apparently on the wane, and the characters of Horus and
Zeus seemed to evolve further. Just as Zeus became less
anthropomorphic, so the guise of Horus adopted by the pharaohs
became the guise of Amon-Re, also a divine presence who apparently
pervaded the whole universe. The remoteness and pervasiveness of
these figures in due course seemed to supplant that of Ptah and
Cronos whilst the more immediate celestial stage of the preclassical
period may have been taken over by a powerful new god whom both
the Greeks and the Egyptians called Heracles.
In the principal wars of the gods as described by Egyptian and
Homeric sources, Heracles, as we have seen, was the offspring of
Zeus or his equivalent. The Orphic variation, if it did not arise from
an overlapping of stories, suggests that Heracles corresponded to a
reappearance in a new world of a very ancient god. Recurrence
indeed became a very important theme in Greek cosmogony but
whether it originated with the Orphic tradition, or is much earlier, is
a question for the historians and the mythologists. In general, it is
clear enough that the gods had offsprings and that there was a selfevident association between Heracles and Heraclids. Moreover, it is
evident that through the Homeric association of the Heraclids with
the downfall of the Mycenean nation, the god Heracles had every
reason later to become a more significant figure in the Greek
pantheon than he might otherwise have become. Thus the inherent
contradictions and uncertainties that unquestionably exist need not
be seen as a great difficulty for analysts but more the result of a
known evolution in ideas about the nature of gods in the preChristian era.
To put the developments in Egypt and Greece in perspective, 43 it is
now fairly clear that the gods and their creator were seen for the first
time during the third millennium BC as perfectly real bodies in the
sky who were primarily concerned in sorting things out for
themselves and only indirectly concerned with the fate of men on
earth. An important part of the creator’s work at this time was an
apparently visible world in the sky which lay close to the Sun’s path
and which embraced the Earth, a vision a probably no less awesome
than the gods themselves and a perpetual source of concern. Man’s
terrified attempts to appeasement, even to the extent of human
sacrifice in some quarters, were a somewhat desperate measure
whose efficacy remained uncertain. By the second millennium BC
however, the conception of things had evolved into a formal dualism
in which one particular great god, father of many others, was seen to
be all-powerful and basically benevolent, whilst another particular
god, also the source of many others, was no less strong but
essentially evil. Both sets of gods, the angels and demons of
subsequent myth, seem to have been looked on as members of a
visible milky way which evidently corresponded to the path of the
Sun rather than the Galactic system to which we now append to
name. These gods had characteristics which we now recognize as
cometary. Their history seems to imply the disintegration, over
several millennia, of a very large comet, the debris producing bands
of light in the sky and occasional devastation on the Earth. And orbit
taking the comet and its offspring along the constellations of the
zodiac is implicit in such features as the enclosure of Blackland, the
flight path of Phaethon, the association of the Orphic Phanes or
Heracles with zodiac (plate 4), and the otherwise inexplicable
classical references to the zodiac as a ‘milky way’.
Subsequently, during the first millennium BC, the malevolent gods
appear to have departed, leaving a single benevolent god who
became identified as both creator and director of a recurring
universe whilst at the same time becoming himself increasingly
remote and less tangible. The precise timing of these developments
may not be clear, but the gradual advance towards a new brand of
monotheism based on an invisible god who was also benevolent
seems eventually to have given rise to a controversial technical
problem, namely the true source of evil in the universe. The problem
was eventually resolved by removing evil from the sky altogether,
where it had always been, and treating it from now on as a
fundamental aspect of the human condition itself.
There need not be too much doubt then that the Greeks in general,
and the Athenians in particular, knew what the Heraclids were and
whence they had come: they were evil bodies and they came out of
the zodiac. But in their subsequent theological conflicts, nullifying
the concept of sky-borne evil, the Greeks seem to have convinced
themselves that the bodies did not exist. Let us now consider how
this came about.