
5 — Renaissance
Solon seems to have been a man of exceptional ability. He is first
heard of during a critical period of the war between Athens and
Megara at the end of the seventh century BC when he persuaded his
fellow citizens to persevere in what seemed a hopeless contest. Then,
having saved the city from ruin and bloody revolution, Solon was
elected an archon in 594 BC and entrusted with the duty of drafting a
new constitution.
Solon appears to have been both just and liberal whilst giving
priority to restoring confidence amongst the manufacturing and
trading industries: thus he forbade the loan of money on the security
of the borrower’s person and he cancelled all outstanding debts. He
revalued the coinage so as to put Athenian traders on terms of
equality with their Ionic counterparts. He also abolished all
privileges of birth and instituted a public assembly, or Ecclesia, upon
which he conferred considerable power. It was a function of this
assembly to debate affairs of state and to establish through
democratic vote the natural, moral and public laws which were then
to be promulgated as decrees by the archons. Displaying unusually
profound wisdom and considerable practical ability, Solon seems to
have proved himself a remarkable legislator and it is a reflection of
his considerable stature and the veneration in which his memory was
held that his laws were duly inscribed on wooden pyramids which
stood on the Acropolis for many years. Indeed, they were somehow
preserved even until the time of Plutarch around AD 120.
In later years, Solon appears to have adopted the role of elder
statesman or ambassador at large for Athens. It is even said that he
exiled himself on puipose for ten years in order to avoid the
importunities of those who were urging him to supplement his
legislation with further clauses. Be that as it may, Solon travelled
widely, going as far as limits of the old Mycenean empire, to Asia
Minor, to Cyprus and Egypt, for example. We know from Homer’s
account that some of the invaders who had attacked at Troy also
found their way to Egypt and it may well be that a tenuous link with
the centre of the empire had been maintained after its downfall. The
account may of course refer to a link between Heraclids and SeaPeoples as much as between humans. Either way, it is known 44 that:
in the Egyptian delta ... there is a certain district which is called
the district of Sais and the great city of the district is also called
Sais ... the citizens have a deity for their foundress, she is called
in the Egyptian tongue Neith and is asserted by them to be the
same whom the Hellenes call (Pallas) Athenae: they are great
lovers of the Athenians, and say that they are in some way
related to them.
It can be supposed therefore that Solon had ample opportunity
through contacts with fellow counhymen during his visit to Sais
around 560 BC, to acquire an accurate picture of Egyptian
knowledge. There seem therefore to be rather good grounds for
supposing that a wise old priest of Sais whom Solon consulted would
have been a reliable informant and that what he reported would have
been scrutinize with the utmost care by the wise old mandarin from
Athens. It is at least possible therefore that we are dealing with
remembered fact and that we should take seriously what Solon
reported back to his fellow-Athenians on his return:
O Solon, you [Greeks] are all young in your minds which hold no
store of old belief based on long tradition, no knowledge hoary
with age. The reason is this. There have been, and will be
hereafter, many and divers destmctions of mankind, the greatest
by the fire and water, though other lesser ones are due to
countless other causes. Thus the story current also in your part
of the world, that Phaethon, child of the Sun, once harnessed his
father’s chariot but could not guide it on his father’s course and
so burnt up everything on the face of the earth and was himself
consumed by the thunderbolt - this legend had the air of a fable;
but the truth behind it is a deviation of the bodies that revolve
in heaven around the earth and a destruction, occurring at
long intervals, of things on the earth by a great
conflagration ... Any great or noble achievement or otherwise
exceptional event that has come to pass, either in your parts or
here or in any place of which we have tidings, has been written
down for ages past in records that are preserved in our temples;
whereas with you and other peoples again and again, life [had
only just] been enriched with letters and all the other necessities
of civilization when once more, after the usual period of years,
the torrents from heaven [swept] down like a pestilence,
leaving only the rude and unlettered among you. And so you
start again like children, knowing nothing of what existed in
ancient times here or in your country ... To begin with, your
people remember only one deluge, though there were many
earlier; and moreover you do not know that the noblest and
bravest race in the world once lived in your country. From a
small remnant of their seed you and all your fellow citizens are
derived; but you know nothing of it because the survivors for
many generations died leaving no word in writing.
This extract is taken from Plato’s dialogues Timaeus and Critias in
which appears the famous story of Atlantis. The Egyptian dates for
the founding of Athens and Sais, which were said to precede the
famous event, are respectively given as 9,000 and 8,000 years ago
which, by the typical reckonings of the time, as noted for example by
Herodotus or Eudoxus, imply 1450/1350 BC or 1300/1200 BC
approximately. Either of these is coincident with the period of the
Mycenean dominion. Moreover, as Critias reports ‘9,000 years have
elapsed since the declaration of war between those who lived outside
and all those who lived inside the Pillars of Heracleds’. Pillars, as we
have noted, emerged from a cosmic enclosure which separated
Blackland, including the Earth, from Redland, once the domain of
the destructive Seth. Thus the drowning of Atlantis seems to relate to
events observed in the sky at or before 1200 BC, the apparent
immersion of an Island of Creation in an extended zodiacal sea,
events during which mankind also suffered at the hands of invading
hordes from the zodiacal band. The Atlantic story deals then with a
seemingly visible assault from the cosmos whose structure was
broadly known, wherein there were gods from whom it was
customary to claim descent, and in whom it was customary to invest
overlordship and ultimate power. Critias was thus able to carry the
story back to an even earlier period in Greece and state how:
Once upon a time the gods divided up the Earth between
them — not in the course of a quarrel; for it would be quite
wrong to think that the gods do not know what is appropriate to
them, or that, knowing it, they would want to annex what
property belongs to others. Each gladly received his just
allocation, and settled his territories; and having done so they
proceeded to look after us, their creatures and children, as
shepherds look after their flocks. They did not use physical
means of control, like shepherds who direct their flocks with
blows, but brought their influence to bear on the creature’s most
sensitive part, using persuasion as a steersman uses the helm to
direct mind as they saw fit and so guide the whole mortal
creature. 45 The various gods, then, administered the various
regions which had been allotted to them. But Hephaestos and
Athene, who shared as brother and sister a common character,
and pursued the same ends in their love of knowledge and skill,
were allotted this land of ours as their joint sphere and as a
suitable and natural home for excellence and wisdom. They
produced a native race of good men and gave them suitable
political arrangements. Their names have been preserved but
what they did has been forgotten because of the destruction of
their successors and the long lapse of time. For as we said
before, the survivors of this destruction were an unlettered
mountain race who had just heard the names of the rulers of the
land but knew little of their achievements. They were glad
enough to give their names to their own children, but knew
nothing of the virtues and institutions of their predecessors,
except for a few hazy reports; for many generations they and
their children were short of bare necessities, and their minds
and thoughts were occupied with providing for them, to the
neglect of earlier history and tradition. For an interest in the
past and historical research come only when communities have
leisure and when men are already provided with the necessities
of life. That is how the names but not the achievements of these
early generations came to be preserved.
Notwithstanding the lacunae in Greek history for reasons which
Critias recounts, we appear to be the recipients, through Plato, of an
old, reasonably coherent, Egyptian description of the role played by
the ancient gods both in the sky and on the ground. The underlying
theme portrayed by Plato is that of a mighty empire subtly controlled
from the centre, a concept which at the time would have departed
from the cut and thrust of Greek feudalism. Plato’s main interest was
political analysis and much of his thinking did eventually provide
some of the inspiration behind the growth of the future Hellenic
empire. Fortunately for our present puipose, however, Plato was also
concerned to understand the astronomical phenomena involved and
he records how Socrates persuaded Timaeus to give a description of
what went on. Thus God began with a spherical body apparently
containing the elements of soul and matter; out of this creation, he
wove two circular bands, 46 similarly created but inclined to each
other, in which were created the various gods — not excluding the
Sun, Moon and planets — who were responsible for producing the
living things on Earth and imparting soul to them. Despite frequent
scholarly attempts to identify these two bands with more modem
imaginary circles on the sky (figure 3), namely the celestial equator
and the ecliptic, the account by Timaeus is quite definitely of
observed bands and real gods: it seems much more likely that the
dual structure of the former cosmic Nile is in fact being described.
Figure 3. In the Timaeus, the ‘body of the heaven’ is said to be
visible but it is also described as a strip of fabric cut down the
middle to form two bands which are bent into relatively inclined
circles fastened at their cross-over points, the celestial motions
associated with the inner circle being specifically described as
different, as would be expected for a body in an eccentric orbit.
One of these bands is said to include the Sun, Moon and planets, but
the latter had only recently begun to impinge on the Greek scientific
consciousness. Timaeus in fact indicates that he has other bodies
also in mind and if we are to consider his account in any way relevant
to other aspects of the Atlantic story, it seems that these other divine
bodies, rather than planets, must be the ones to associate with the
‘torrents from heaven’ that sweep down’ like a pestilence ... after the
usual period of years’. Thus, he says that ‘they are so bewildering in
numbers and so amazing in intricacy’ that many are ‘virtually
unaware that their wandering motions are time at all ... it is beyond
our power to know or tell about the birth of these other gods ... both
those whose circuits we see in the sky and those who only appear to
us when they wish’.
We have therefore from Solon an explicit statement that the
Mycenean collapse was caused by an encounter with a swarm of
astronomical bodies, giving rise to a great conflagration. The surprise
to Solon of course was not so much the facts, for the Phaethon story
was already well known, but the remarkably naturalistic terms used
by the old priest at Sais to described events which were commonly
regarded as the work of gods. The advocate of open government back
home thus learned that underlying the panoply of religion and
popular magic was an understanding of the world that needed no
recourse to divine agency: instead, man was just an innocent victim
of recurring encounters between freely moving bodies in space!
To what extent this particular contact catalyzed contemporary Greek
thinking must be uncertain; but the fact is that the first Greek
attempts to understand the universe in naturalistic terms, rather
than as something controlled by the caprice of the gods, date from
this time. These attempts began with a group of natural philosophers
from Ionia, shortly after 600 BC. Ionia, a coastal strip of land which
is part of Asia Minor, was geographically an interface between the
organized, conservative Mesopotamian societies and the less
centralized, more volatile Greek world. It was therefore a region in
which thinking Greeks would compare their own traditions with
those arriving from distant lands. However mere comparison of gods
and the like would not on its own have triggered the origin of natural
philosophy in Ionian Greece. Both Egyptian and Mesopotamian
principles had to be put into the melting pot. From this time the
Greeks, reared on a diet of Homer and still bearing the cross of the
Mycenean tragedy, determined to explore the material world and
expose it to the light of day. In so doing they began a process that
eventually gave rise to western civilization.
In these days when good and evil are frequently regarded as terms to
describe the moral choices made by individuals, it is difficult to
conceive of a climate of opinion in which they were absolute entities
ordained by a cosmic Deity. Yet if one is to appreciate the enormity
of the change that now overtook ancient Greece during the sixth and
seventh centuries BC, it is necessary to realize how deeply the old
viewpoint was impressed at this time upon the peoples of western
Asia, the Fertile Crescent and the eastern Mediterranean. The
ancient Egyptians in particular were outstanding in the interest they
displayed in the moral aspects of the cosmos. Thus in their complex
conception of the world, as we have already seen, the gods, the
universe and the sovereign ruler were inseparably combined in a
fundamental enduring principle: ‘the good and worth of which was to
be lasting. It had not been disturbed since the day of creation [and]
he who transgresse[d] its ordinances [was] punished’. Seth, as the
essence of evil, with the characteristics of the Devil, was certainly
opposed to Horus but collectively the gods were regarded as good
and the guardians of morality even if some might have malevolent
qualities themselves. Visitations of disaster on earth were thus
understood quite clearly as the acts of orderly cosmic gods upholding
the right and true. The peculiarity of the Egyptian ethos however,
which might not have been anticipated, was the extension of this
principle to everyday behavior for the purpose of maintaining an
orderly society. Thus, according to the Egyptians, it was the height of
wisdom to be just, righteous, godly and human; and it was supposed
that the ethical principles involved here, coupled with a sense of
social justice and truth, were provided individually through some
kind of divine consciousness. One was brought up accordingly to
accept that the gods were righteous judges having knowledge of
everything that took place and watching the actions of every man,
punishing wrongdoing and rewarding virtuous acts. Such was the
level of moral ascendancy implicit in this understanding of the
cosmos and the state that it was generally felt to be useless to try to
alter that which had been predetermined by the gods or to pry into
their intentions and decrees. Yet, underlying this superstructure of
state-imposed belief, as Solon was made aware, was a detached
materialistic view of the world without any moralistic connotations
at all.
In Mesopotamia likewise, and diffusing throughout the Near East,
the same fear of heavenly retribution dominated beliefs; but here,
there was less of a feeling that the gods were fundamentally good. As
in Egypt, every phase of existence — cosmic, civic, domestic and
personal — was brought within the orbit of the gods; that is, ethics
and religion were inseparable, but the emphasis in this case fell more
clearly on offences that were committed unwittingly. The public
attitude to the gods therefore was apparently far more ritualistic, far
more given to the belief that disaster would come regardless of any
human penitence. In view of such fatalism, there was less concern on
the part of the state regarding fundamental or private
beliefs — benevolent liberalism perhaps rather than benevolent
paternalism. Unlike the pharaohs therefore, the Mesopotamian kings
were not cosmic figures though they were still very concerned
personally to discharge their duties in the eyes of the gods by
maintaining the appearances of state order. Oaths may have been
taken at the temple or its gate, and referred to the judgement of God,
but the judges were not priests. The Babylonian code and the
administration of its legislation, even as far back as Hammurabi
(about 1750 BC), were essentially secular and made no claim to have
been divine pronouncements, in spite of their having been issued
with the sanction of Marduk (Zeus). The responsibility for the wellbeing of the state seems therefore to have rested more directly on the
king and he could thus represent himself as suffering vicariously on
behalf of his people, a fundamental notion that persisted through
into the Christian era.
The loose federation of Greek nation states never became a nation in
the modern sense, and Athens only achieved its dominance,
becoming a centre for the diffusion of culture, after the fifth century
BC. But in the actions taken by Solon, we see the early signs of an
inventive radically from that of the Egyptians, Mesopotamians and
other Near Eastern nations. Although there is no evidence of any
conscious attempt to turn away from pharaohs and kings, Solon
seems to have played the role of a head of state who wished to be
both a detached and disinterested figure. Civic affairs and the nature
of the material world, it seems to have been decided, were matters
now to be settled by rational and public argument. The responsibility
for the well-being of the state was to be shared equally, in such a
manner that the conscience of the first among equals was free. It was
a novel development, with the good fortune to be supervised over
two and a half centuries by men of genius like Solon, Pisistratus,
Cleisthenes and Pericles, but would it work? Indeed, would the
disappearance of the gods from the sky, real or imagined, affect the
result?