
6 — Enlightenment
So long as the gods were real, visible and powerful entities in the sky,
mankind’s understanding of nature was likely to be in terms of their
complex comings and goings, their genealogies and fadings, and
their potential for capricious and devastating intervention in the
affairs of Earth. The corollary is that tales of the kind brought back
by Solon, in which the devastation involved not the arbitrary actions
of gods but the wholly natural action of bodies from space, would not
have been credible if these gods were still to be seen. The rise of
theory in the Greece of the seventh century BC, in which the cosmos
was explained in natural terms rather than through divine willful
action, could only have taken place if the sky gods themselves were
fading or had disappeared from sight. There was a struggle, of
course: Anaxagoras was exiled for casting the Sun as a red-hot stone,
whilst Socrates was executed for espousing invisible gods. But
eventually the belief in a single non-interventionist god was
established, together with the notion that nature was set to run on its
predestined course with only an occasional nudge from high. Again,
the rise of this movement could only plausibly have taken place
against the backdrop of fading, impotent deities. 47
The transition from myth to logic, from story to theory, was never
complete and did not take place all at once; indeed it is likely that
patterns of myth affected the patterns of rational thought with which
the early natural philosophers emerged. Thus what appear to be real
celestial events are described as a story, the end of Atlantis, by Plato
as late as the fourth century BC; and not unexpectedly, the earliest
theories of nature contain elements appropriate to a night sky which
was different from the one we see now.
Thales (625-545 BC) was traditionally the first of the natural
philosophers, but Anaximander of Miletos (610-547 BC) who
followed him is the first whose theorizing is preserved in any detail.
A recent reconstruction of Thales’ cosmogony runs along the
following lines: first there was a great ocean in which a circular eddy
developed and the Earth grew. Round about the air was driven by the
whirling currents whilst luminaries apparently soared upwards with
the wind and then plunged down again through the water. The whole
of this cosmos, which could run down and vanish only to start up
again later, was borne on the sea like a vessel, controlled and steered
by the water itself which, immortal and ageless, mover of things
outside it, shaker of the Earth, also has the attributes of divinity.
Anaximander, likewise, seems to have envisaged a ‘boundless’
medium but in his case things started with a fiery egg-like formation
out of the boundless, from which subsequently grew or separated off
various rings enclosing one another like the barks of a tree. These
rings, described as ‘temporary gods’, appear to have surrounded the
earth which was cylindrical in shape, being three times as broad as it
was deep, the upper face being where we lived. The whole of this
system then hung freely in space, remaining in position by reason of
its equal distance from everything else. The rings were clearly
understood as coming beneath the Moon and were like hoops of
compressed air, enclosing fire inside them, but with vents from
which the light of stars beamed forth.
It is difficult to see how such apparently bizarre ideas could have
arisen unless they had naturalistic basis. The notion of stars as
wheels filled with fire, with openings through which starlight is
emitted, is particularly strange to modem eyes. That these ‘stars’
were seen as the nearest of the heavenly bodies, closer than Sun or
Moon, is also strange because occultations of normal stars, their
sudden disappearance when the disc of the Moon passes in front of
them, are not uncommon and must have been known to
Anaximander. It may be then, that in these very early cosmological
speculations we are in fact detecting elements of a night sky which is
not the one we see now, and that here we have an indication as to the
nature of conspicuous bodies in the pre-classical sky which, like the
ancient gods, were subsequently to disappear.
The Pythagoreans at this time were already of the opinion that the
Earth itself was a star (presumably a planet) and that it moved
around a central fire designated as the Mother of Gods or the Citadel
of Zeus. It is possible therefore that the underlying picture was of the
planet Earth in motion around a central source of fire, and of this fire
displaying itself as stars shooting through a window in the sky
whenever the Earth crossed hoops of fire perceived as an extension
of the central source. Contrary to the usual belief nowadays, the
orbital notion of the Earth was probably well understood by the early
Greeks and was never forgotten. We certainly know from Cicero
much later that Nicetus of Syracuse considered all the stars to be at
rest and the Earth alone to be in motion; the same philosopher, he
added, had shown that the Earth, by a movement of its axis,
produced the same appearance in the heavens as if these were in
motion and the Earth at rest. Aristarchus of Samos (310-230 BC)
likewise anticipated Copernicus in almost every respect. Indeed, it is
likely that this viewpoint was already present in the time of
Pythagoras for he too conceived that a movement of the Earth about
its centre caused the succession of night and day.
The question is then whether identification can be made of a central
source in the ancient sky, containing within itself hoops of fire. There
is no evidence that the Pythagoreans looked upon the central fire as
the Sun, and the only plausible alternative, if they had a real object in
mind, is the zodiacal cloud. Often overlooked by modern scholars,
the zodiacal cloud is a discus-shaped swathe of comet dust through
which the planets constantly move and whose most concentrated
region is visible in good climates close to the Sun after dusk and
before dawn. At the present time it can be seen as a pillar of light no
less bright than the Milky Way, the pillar appearing close to the
vertical in equatorial latitudes. If the zodiacal light were at one time
much brighter, and contained decaying comets within it, then it
would be seen to contain structure, and the Earth in the course of its
orbit would run through these structures, or ‘hoops of fire’,
sometimes to spectacular effect. In this connection it is of interest to
mention a conjecture attributed to Democritus of Abdera, who lived
about 450 years before Christ, and whom Seneca designates as the
most subtle of all the ancients. According to Seneca, this writer held
that there were many bodies circulating about the centre of the
universe but invisible to us on account of the obscurity of their light
or their positions in their orbits.
Plate 6. Visible debris from Encke’s Comet or its progenitor: the
Zodiacal Light from South Africa, 7 June 1843, as drawn by the
Edinburgh astronomer Charles Piazzi Smyth. The light is aligned
along the path of the zodiacal constellations, and was the track
along which, in remote antiquity, active comets from the Ence
material moved (by kind permission of Don Africana Library,
Durban, South Africa).
It is not unlikely that Pythagoras gained much of his knowledge from
the Babylonian school (chapter 1); and although the initial
conception of an Earth-centered world is now popularly associated
with the very ancient civilizations, Seleucus, a distinguished Greek of
the Babylonian school a century after Aristarchus, was still
maintaining quite correctly that the Earth not only had a diurnal
rotation but also an orbital motion around the Sun. We cannot
therefore exclude the possibility that the Babylonians of this period
always had a reasonably accurate impression of the underlying
structure of the Solar System which somehow became distorted in
the hands of the Greeks. It could not have been an impression that
was ever in the forefront of Babylonian thinking however, for if our
understanding of the pre-Socratic philosophers is correct, the
Babylonians and others of the period would have been preoccupied
with meteors and fireballs and their association with comets. Indeed,
if they understood meteors and fireballs correctly, as the products of
dying comets in hoop-like orbits that were no longer visible, there
would have been a quite natural awareness of ‘hidden stars’ coming
between us and the Moon. Something of this knowledge may have
been preserved in the teaching of Anaxagoras (c. 500-428 BC) for he
held that the Earth is flat but:
that the Sun and Moon and all the stars are fiery stones carried
round by the rotation of the aether. Below the stars are the Sun
and Moon and also certain bodies which revolve with them but
are invisible to us ... The Moon is eclipsed by the Earth screening
the Sun’s light from it and sometimes, too, by the [other,
invisible] bodies below the Moon coming in front of it.
In fact, the pre-Socratic philosophers generally, drawing upon
Egyptian, Babylonian, Persian and other ancient sources, appear to
describe a world that came into being through the production and
concentration of four elements (fire, air, water, earth) from the
original undifferentiated mass or cosmic egg. The world formed of
these elements was basically a temporary flat system in the zodiac. It
included the flat Earth surrounded by the Ocean. The Ocean
surrounding the Earth was supposed to be continuous with the sky
or ‘waters above’. A succession of such worlds was apparently
envisaged, each manifestation being in due course destroyed and
returned to the so-called ‘boundless’.
It is remarkable that this is exactly the picture we expect for an
extended series of enhancements of the zodiacal light (plate 6) by a
disintegrating comet. The disintegration of a major comet or its
offshoots injects a large mass of dust into the zodiacal cloud, and
since the latter is seen by reflected sunlight, the result is a temporary
increase in its observed brightness. Rare giant comets, orbiting in the
inner planetary system with periods of only a few years, are a likely
major source of such debris although no such active comet is visible
at the present time (see chapter 10). These early accounts may
nevertheless be understandable as attempts to describe the process
by which an active comet of this kind periodically enhanced the
zodiacal light at some past epoch, creating clouds of debris which
slowly spread along the constellations. In fact, there are several
indications that the earliest references to the Milky Way are
descriptions of an intense zodiacal light and that it, too, was able to
reach below the Moon. It was held, for example, that the Milky Way
was formerly the path of the Sun or that it lay in the Earth’s shadow
produced by the Sun. Furthermore, it was a hot accumulation of the
disintegration products of many comets. 48
Jets issuing from rotating wheels of fire; bodies coming between
Moon and Earth; temporary ‘worlds’ forming in the plane of the
zodiac: it seems reasonable to conclude that the earliest philosophers
were describing, perhaps from the experience of their forebears, an
essentially correct association between cometary disintegration
products and the formation of a luminous dust cloud in the plane of
the ecliptic, albeit one which was also supposed to come between us
and the Moon. We are beginning to see, perhaps, hints of a night sky
which was not the one we see now; and perhaps even clues to the
nature of the Heraclids. The gods and their thunderbolts, now on the
wane, were merely comets and fireballs entering a less active phase.
Until recently, it has been assumed that statements about the cosmos
provided by the pre-Socratic natural philosophers are best
understood in terms of planetary rather than cometary phenomena
were directly observed or whether the knowledge of such phenomena
was derived from earlier historical sources no longer extant.
Obviously the Pythagorean link might have been important here,
providing an input of knowledge from very early Babylonian sources.
On the other hand, if the destructions of the Minoan and Mycenean
civilizations (chapter 3) bear witness to a then fairly recent but
substantial comet disintegration in the sky, it is to be expected that
some fairly major debris would have enhanced the putative Milky
Way in the zodiacal during the Dark Age, that is, during the previous
several hundred years. As we know, these phenomena would then be
no earlier than the exploits of Heracles and the Heraclids: historical
sources relating to these phenomena would then in principle be no
less accessible than the sources available to Homer and Hesiod.
If the sky was in fact different in the first millennium BC and before,
this might also account for the seemingly abnormal preoccupation of
nearly all the natural philosophers during the classical period with
meteoric phenomena generally. In the famous De Rerum Natura of
Lucretius (96-55 BC) for example, one finds that the ordinary facts of
astronomy or meteorology, the motions of Sun, Moon and planets, or
the incidence of frost and wind, snow and ice, are not really of any
great interest. The main focus of attention is the range of phenomena
believed to be associated with divine agencies, namely comets and
meteors, thunder and lightning, volcanoes and earthquakes, all
regarded as supernatural events liable to induce a state of
terror. 49 The Greek threefold classification of comets into ‘beards’,
‘cypress trees’ and ‘torches’, several kinds of the latter clearly
describing fireballs or bolide falls, is consistent with this view. This
focus of attention, far from being anomalous, may be evidence of the
enhanced fireball and meteoric flux during the classical period
associated with the recent evolution of a large disintegrating comet
or its orbit. It is true of course that by the end of the first millennium
BC, many natural philosophers had finally settled on the wholly
mistaken idea that comets and even the Milky Way derived from
some kind of terrestrial whirlwind, but they have also left enough
evidence to indicate that their imagined action of whirlwinds was
probably no more than an explanation based on well-known meteor
streams that extended into the sub-lunar zone.
For the most part then, the natural philosophers of the pre-Socratic
era seem to provide us with descriptions of the astronomical
environment in which the old Babylonian and Egyptian fears would
not have been out of place. Indeed there is no convincing evidence
that the model of the universe espoused at this time ever really
disappeared. Certainly Lucretius and Seneca, much later on in the
classical period, provide us with accounts of comets and meteors
which are wholly consistent with these earlier views and in general
agreement with our modern understanding of them. At the same
time though, it is also clear that cosmological thinking underwent a
profound change in ancient Greece and that this finally happened
around the fourth century BC. A new tradition of planetary
observation emerged, together with a new-found academic interest
in geometry and circular motion. 50
We might easily suppose the study of planetary movement over the
sky, like the rise of the new rationalism which had no need of gods,
was only likely to be pursued if the more awesome gods had been
banished from the sky; and the tradition can in fact be traced back to
the Pythagoreans in the sixth century BC. Indeed there is evidence
(table 4) that the planets were first given names after this time
though not, as it happens, the names of well-known gods. The latter
were only tacked on later and it says some things for the nature of
the more ancient gods that the planets then acquired some rather
artificial and quite inappropriate cometary characteristics. Even as
late as the ninth century AD, the Baghdad astrologer Kitab alMughni described Jupiter as ‘bearded’, Mars as a ‘lamp’, Mercury as
a ‘spear’ and Venus as a ‘horseman’ (plate 7). These terms may be
compared with those used to describe comets by Pliny in his Natural
History: mane, hair, beard, fleece, dart, sword, spear, cask, horn,
torch and crown.
Simplified tabulation showing the history of planetary names in
Greece, Rome and Babylonia. The Babylonian names are very
old but cannot be precisely dated. The attachment of the names
of gods to planets originated in Babylonia.
Column 1: divine names used in Greece at the time of Plato (430
BC);
Column 2: scientific names used in Greece in Late Antiquity
(after 200 BC);
Column 3: names of Roman gods attached to planets (after 100
BC);
Column 4: Babylonian scientific name; association with planets
possibly late
Column 5: Babylonian divine name.
The idea that the planets might be important only came into its own
however with the work of Plato and Eudoxus. The latter, in
particular, elaborated the explanation of orbits in terms of steady
circular motion whilst Plato emphasized the beauty and simplicity of
the geometry that was implied. Plato’s influence was considerable: he
held that the world was ruled by logic and that its structure could be
worked out by the application of pure thought. Even in the Timaeus
for example the gods did not destroy Atlantis capriciously but
through logical necessity. But Plato, as we have noted, still took note
of the ancient world-picture.
Plate 7. Ninth-century classification of planets from the work of
the Baghdad astrologer Kitab al-Mughni, where each is given
clear cometary characteristics. The descriptions used are: Top
row, left to right: bearded (Jupiter); lamp (Mars); spear
(Mercury); horseman (Venus). Centre row: giant (Sun); girl
(Moon); kettle (Saturn). Bottom row: circle, lamp, skewer, jar,
javelin (Princeton University Library).
The same can hardly be said of the radical Aristotelian cosmology
that followed, however. Plato’s pupil Aristotle (384-322 BC) took a
more pragmatic view of the world and the ideal of science which he
developed has carried immense weight even to the present day. As a
practical zoologist his attitude was basically empirical, and he placed
great emphasis on the more immediate evidence of the senses: ‘here
and now’ rather than ‘there and then’. The effect of this was to render
received knowledge less credible, the more so if it was not in
accordance with very immediate impressions. This then merely
served to hasten the degeneration of cometary gods into distant folk
memories, and in the cosmology which Aristotle developed, comets
did indeed completely lose their status as celestial objects along with
their portentous overtones. They came then to be classified as
somewhat ephemeral meteorological phenomena, no more
significant than a passing shower. Opinion at large was never
convinced of this newfangled mediocrity of cometary gods and still
looked on them with awe, but Aristotelian cosmology and its
sophisticated fascination with planets rapidly gained the ascendancy
in academic circles and, to the extent that state activity depends a
good deal on the accumulated wisdom of academics, comets ceased
to have any particular importance. To all intents and purposes, this
shift of view has persisted to the present day.
The strongest plank in Aristotle’s cosmology was his assumption that
the Earth could not be revolving around the Sun. He was aware that
any such motion would appear to displace the stars in the course of
the year — the phenomenon of parallax. Since the immense distances
of the stars were not known in his day, this rationale for a stationary
Earth seems valid, but to keep it in perspective it should be kept in
mind that the Copernican revolution much later was pressed without
the benefit of this knowledge either!
Another new departure in Aristotle’s teaching was the introduction
of a fifth element called aether which occupied the outermost space
beyond the Moon and which was more divine than fire, air, water
and earth. From it were formed the stars and planets, in their
respective spheres, which were said to be eternal and intelligent as
well as divine. It was also a natural property of matter to seek its
rightful place in the world, for example earth down and fire up, but
because the divine material of the stars and planets was already in its
natural state of perfection, the motion of these bodies was neither up
nor down. By implication the motion was in circles around the Earth,
and it was another logical element of Aristotle’s theory that circular
motion was more perfect than motion in a straight line.
Aristotle however did not regard the planets as we do today, as a
free-wheeling system; he thought they were interlocked and
ultimately driven by a Prime Mover whose sphere lay beyond that of
the fixed stars (plate 8); but the scheme, like similar ones which
came before and after, had many defects of which he must have been
aware. Thus planetary movements over the sky are somewhat
complex, being generally eastwards against the stellar background,
but sometimes looping in a retrograde direction; and their tracks lie
almost, but not quite, in the plane of the ecliptic defined by the solar
motion. To explain this complexity of movement Aristotle needed to
introduce 55 spheres for 9 objects (5 planets, the Sun, Moon, fixed
stars and the Prime Mover); an otherwise simple geometrical model,
even from its inception, was an elaborate and highly confusing
mechanism. Nevertheless, the disposition of matter in the universe,
conceived as being perfect above the Moon and imperfect below, was
obviously regarded by contemporary natural philosophers, as well as
those who followed, as so elegant and reasonable that it transcended
any detailed theoretical shortcomings. To be consistent with the
Aristotelian scheme of things, therefore, there was further good
reason that the erratic comets and the unpredictable fireballs should
no longer be part of the perfect heavens. Indeed, it became necessary
to dissociate comets from the gods altogether and relegate them to
almost the lowliest plane of all.
Although Aristotle then had for reasons of pragmatism and
theoretical elegance downgraded comets, and although there was, as
we shall see, a political dimension to the ‘planetization’ of gods, these
reasons only found favour at first in the Alexandrian school and were
overshadowed by the simple fact that the cometary gods had
disappeared. For as the sky gods faded, the myths repeated from one
generation to the next would become less and less comprehensible.
On the one hand the tales were plainly to do with celestial beings; on
the other hand there was a problem of identity. As time went on, the
only moving bodies left in the zodiac, apart from Sun and Moon,
were the planets. The planets were too few in number and too simple
in behavior to carry the rich complexity of myths; but they had
become the only candidates available. Inevitably then, the
transference of the celestial adventures of the gods from comets to
planets, for which the Greeks were primarily responsible between
600 and 200 BC, extended throughout the civilized world.
Plate 8. The Aristotelian planetary system as represented by the
Nirnberg Chronicle of 1493 (reproduced by permission of
Sotheby’s, London). The Earth (terra) resides at the centre of a
series of concentric spheres representing the other three basic
elements (water, air, fire), all of which, according to Aristotle as
he was interpreted by medieval philosophers, are associated
with their particular ideal levels. Beyond that are the crystalline
spheres to which are attached the celestial bodies: first the
Moon, then Mercury and Venus, the Sun and the outer three
planets, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. Next comes the sphere of the
zodiac and then the sphere of the fixed stars in countless
numbers. The penultimate sphere is Aristotle’s Prime Mover’,
whilst the final sphere is the domain of God and the Heavenly
Host. This was to remain the popular image of the cosmos long
after the investigations of Kepler, Copernicus and Galileo had
posited a quite different order.
The transition also marks an interesting change in the perceived
nature of the gods. Henceforth they appear more abstract, remote
and impersonal, so much so that some commentators remark that
they are no longer the typical objects of a religious man’s worship.
Thi s is not to say that Aristotle was basically a secular thinker
however for there are references to living gods to be found scattered
throughout his writings. The presence of these new characteristics is
more an indication that Aristotle was concerned to remove the
elements of fear and superstition from man’s relationship with gods.
He dismissed the old anthropomorphic deities of the Olympian
pantheon as mere myths and skillfully covered his tracks by also
insisting that ‘our ancestors’ did not purvey unmixed superstition,
having dimly perceived that a certain primary substance was divine
and that this primary substance was to be found in the heavens. Such
skill enabled Aristotle to maintain a worldview that did not fly in the
face of the ancient divinities but nevertheless made it possible to
ascribe, to the new-found planets, supernatural powers that
eventually went far beyond their inherent capabilities.
There was perhaps a degree of artifice in this line of argument, but
one should keep in mind the prominence given to open confrontation
and debate in the society of ancient Greece. 49 It has been said that:
the institutions of the city-state called for new qualities of
leadership, put a premium on skill in speaking and produced a
public who appreciated the exercise of that skill. Claims to
particular wisdom and knowledge in other fields besides the
political were similarly liable to scrutiny, and in the competition
between the many and varied new claimants to such knowledge,
those who deployed evidence and argument were at an
advantage compared with those who did not ... Examination of
the Greek evidence suggests that this very paradigm of the
competitive debate may have provided the essential framework
for the growth of natural science.
But if this is so, then it was words rather than observation, logic
rather than experiment, which lay at the heart of Greek science; and
we can be reasonably certain that it was Aristotle’s intention, as well
as his achievement, to mesh revolutionary astronomical theory into a
pattern involving new gods that most of his contemporaries would be
unable to dent by argument. Right from the start therefore, the new
planetary gods were provided with a secure rationale based on
perceived fact. But it was barely possible to have the one without the
other: Aristotle’s new cosmology demanded wholesale commitment
to the new, tamed gods in a state of heavenly perfection.
There was a political dimension also to the revolution. What, now,
was the role of the gods in human affairs? The dissension over this
issue went back to the very foundation of the Athenian assembly, and
it both fuelled and was fuelled by the lack of cohesion amongst the
city-states which frequently threatened to return Greece to the
conditions of the Dark Age. Inevitably, there were those who saw
definite advantages in promoting the new anodyne version of the
gods. As Karl Marx was later to recognize, there was a sense in which
the more sophisticated aristocrats of ancient Greece may have
perceived the potential benefits of treating religion as the opium of
the people. This attitude may already have been implicit in the
paternalism of the old Egyptian state but if something like the cosmic
pharaoh could not be reintroduced, sophistry would certainly permit
the trappings of religion and public debate to continue whilst a
privileged few, committed only to neutral gods, manipulated the
machinery of government and Academe behind the scenes.
The aristocratic Critias allows us a glimpse of these ideas in the
making when he suggests:
That a man of shrewd and subtle mind invented for men the fear
of the gods so that there might be something to frighten the
wicked even if they acted, spoke or thought in secret. To this end
he introduced the concept of divinity. There is, he said, a spirit
enjoying endless life, hearing and seeing with his mind,
exceedingly wise and all-observing, bearer of a divine nature. He
will hear everything spoken among men and can see everything
that is done. If you are silently plotting evil, it will not be hidden
from the gods, so clever are they. With this story, he presented
the most seductive of teachings, concealing the truth with lying
words. For a dwelling he gave them the place whose mention
would most powerfully strike the hearts of men, whence, as he
knew, fears came to mortals and help for their wretched lives;
that is, the vault above, where he perceived the lightnings and
the dread roars of thunders, and the starry face and form of
heaven - fair wrought by the cunning craftsmanship of Cronos;
whence too the burning meteor makes its way, and the liquid
rain descends on earth ... So, I think, first of all, did someone
persuade men to believe there exists a race of gods.
It is not to be supposed that these developments emerged in their
final form overnight. Plato and Aristotle were regarded with no great
awe in their own lifetime even though it was their explorations into
the realm of new ideas that ultimately broke the ancient traditions.
Nor must it be supposed that there was some kind of knowing
conspiracy between the aristocracy and Academe. Of course, it often
happens that some particular way of looking at the natural world
finds itself in harmony with some particular way of ordering society.
For example, in a longestablished monarchical state, it is easier to
see the natural world in terms of design and divine government; on
the other hand, in the ambience of a non-authoritarian democracy, a
natural world of order and authority might seem less plausible than
one of materialism, without divine intervention or design.
The assignment of cause and effect in such a situation is bound to be
an elusive matter. Nevertheless, with the benefit of hindsight, we can
now see that it was almost certainly Aristotle who, breaking away
from his mentor Plato, dissociating comets from the celestial realm,
and invoking purely circular motion for the planets on Platonist
grounds of elegance, appreciated that there could never be any
question of the planets coming into contact with the Earth. In
principle therefore, the Earth was safe and there was no ultimate
sanction on degenerate people by gods in the form of a cataract of
fire. Public opinion regarding the authority of sky gods might not be
gainsaid but it could be diverted, and more or less inevitably,
Aristotle’s Prime Mover became identified with the principal Deity
whilst the new planetary gods were regarded as exerting quite
illusory ’planetary influences’ across empty space, these influences
controlling events here on Earth. There therefore arose the essence
of a world view in which horoscopic astrology seemed perfectly
natural.
In this way, out of a very basic need on the part of rulers to invent
gods who corresponded as closely as possible to an orderly public
perception, several generations of Greek academics moulded a brand
new cosmology which was subsequently perfected by the
Alexandrian school and came to serve as the basis for horoscopic
astrology. It is a matter of history now that it took subsequent
generations almost two thousand years to unravel the complexities
introduced by the Aristotelian style of argument, and to recognize
the fundamental importance, for the purpose of arriving at the truth,
of dissociating the arguments of Academe from the requirements of
crowd control in the face of a perceived danger. It is often not
appreciated nowadays how this fundamental requirement had to be
learned the hard way.
Through an extraordinary combination of intellectual devices and
errors then, during a period of declining comet activity and
diminishing zodiacal cloud, which was nevertheless enhanced above
current levels, Pythagoras, Plato and Aristotle led their
contemporaries and indeed their successors to a seemingly plausible
and yet wholly erroneous view of the nature of the universe, based
very largely on a contrived understanding of the behavior of the
planets.
Of the various states which engaged in the war of 371-362 BC,
Athens, with the exception of Thebes, fared the best. However, the
actions of the Athenian government evidently became increasingly
arbitrary. Samos, for example, which had fallen into the hands of the
Persians, was conquered in 365 BC but instead of freeing her old ally,
Athens established an island colony by exporting a large number of
her poorer citizens. Those other towns which had come together in
league with Athens in 378 BC looked on in disapproval. So too did
the fiercely independent Macedonians who, though not very distant
kinsmen of the Greeks, continued in the four century BC to live a
kind of tribal life not very different from that of the Hellenes at the
end of the Dark Age. The Macedonian nobility were familiar with the
Greek language however and had adopted Greek names for
themselves such as Archelaus, Pausanias, Lysinachus and Ptolemaus,
as well as for their gods.
Foremost in the Hellenization of Macedonia had been their king,
Alexander I, who invited Socrates to Pella to instruct the youth. And
it was his great grandson Philip II (359-336 BC) whose inspiration
now began to turn the tide for the Hellenes.
Philip II was an unscrupulous operator who both admired and
despised the Greeks and their culture. He obviously took a pleasure
in outwitting his Athenian adversaries and nothing stood in his way
when it came to advancing Macedonian interests. Corruption and the
sword his favourite weapons, Philip rapidly dominated Greece and
brought Athens within his grasp. He also brought the great
philosopher Aristotle to his court in order to be the tutor of his 13-
year-old son. And the omnivorous appetite for knowledge which
inspired Aristotle and ranged over every subject from botany to
metaphysics and from constitutional history to moral philosophy,
seems to have influenced the young Alexander in no small measure.
A clever, inquisitive restless Greek mind was thus cultivated in a
rather special Macedonian pupil by a rather special teacher.
Upon the assassination of Philip, Greece knew little of the young
man who came to the Macedonian throne. But it was soon clear that
the power of Philip had fallen into the hands of a man even greater
than Philip himself, one of the most extraordinary characters that
Europe has ever known, and a man whose personality was to be
stamped on the history of the world for at least a thousand years.
There were other strains in his character besides that of the generous
knight; he had a strong infusion of the unscrupulous energy of
Philip: those who crossed his path or merely incurred his suspicion
he swept away without pity or remorse; and as he grew older, he
became as conscienceless as his father. But the quality which enabled
Alexander to leave his mark on history was his military talent. He
was heaven-born general, and was besides brought up with every
advantage that he could have desired.
The moment that Philip was dead all Greece gave a sigh of relief and
prepared to forget the Macedonians and recommence their usual
intrigues and wars. But before anything more serious was done,
Alexander swooped down among them with thirty thousand men at
his back, compelling the unprepared Greek states to elect him as
supreme commander of the Hellene confederacy. Within six months
he was back in Macedonia preparing to deal with incursions along
the northern frontier and assaults on the force which his father had
sent into Asia across the Hellespont. These latter were a source of
particular annoyance and nothing could be more inspiring to the
enthusiastic mind of Alexander than a crusade of Hellenism against
the Persian barbarians to the east. In the event, his invasion of Asia
Minor was followed by an early strategic withdrawal by Darius and
thus simply inspired even greater aspirations. Anatolia, Levant,
Palestine had all fallen to the conquering Greeks by 332 BC, whilst
Egypt capitulated without a blow: its inhabitants regarded the
Macedonians as deliverers from the Persian yoke against which they
had long striven. Alexander made a triumphant entry to Memphis
and then sailed down the Nile to its western mouth where, struck
with the capacities of the spot, he drew out a plan for the foundation
of a great maritime city and christened it by his own name. Thus
came into being the seaport of Alexandria, one of the most enduring
and famous of all the monuments which Alexander reared for
himself.
Whilst staying at Alexandria, the new king resolved to visit the
famous oracle of Zeus Ammon in the Libyan desert. With a
handpicked regiment of troops he marched for five days across the
sands, and came in safety to the palm groves of the fertile oasis
which sheltered the temple of god. The oracle wisely hailed him as
the son of Zeus, and bade him go forth and conquer all the world, for
none would be able to withstand him till the day when he should be
taken up to the gods. His company were then bidden to salute him as
more than a mortal, and to offer him sacrifice. This hyperbolical
flattery seems to have turned the head of Alexander: it was noted
that he took the oracle in all seriousness, and was in future much
please when anyone saluted him as the son of Ammon.
In the spring of 331 BC, Alexander retraced his steps through Egypt,
Palestine and Syria, crossing the Euphrates and the Tigris and
advancing into Persia. By now, no one doubted that he was the ‘great
king’, Darius being no more than a luckless pretender, and the
Persian realm soon fell. Meanwhile, Alexander’s pride and vanity
knew no limit; he took to assuming divine honours as his right,
dressed himself, to the suiprise of his comrades, in the purple robe
and tiara of an eastern king, and surrounded his person with oriental
courtiers. But by the time of his early death, Alexander had
completely transformed the outlook of the Greeks. The Macedonian
conquest of the East revolutionized the relations of the little Hellenic
states both with each other and with the outer world. The old system
of local autonomy and constant wars to maintain the balance of
power had now become impossible. What could be more inspiring
than to see the old Hellenic genius for colonizing was not extinct; to
behold the conquerors laying hands on every province from the
Aegean to the Indus, and covering them with Greek cities as great
and as vigorous as any that had existed in the Hellenic fatherland? In
due course, under the firm management of one of Alexander’s
generals, Ptolemy Soter, who ruled from 305 to 283 BC, the city of
Alexandria became the seat of the new Hellenism. The famous
Museum and Library of Alexandria were set up under Ptolemy, and
the scientific enterprise shifted from mainland Greece towards
Alexandria.
However, as the customs of local autonomy familiar to the Greeks
gave way to those of a more centralized regime, the head of state was
able to take on many of the trappings of a divine, cosmic ruler, a type
familiar to the Egyptians. There was a difference between the new
cosmic ruler and the older archetype, however, for this was no longer
a head of state conscious of gods exercising an ultimate sanction in
the form of cleansing cataracts of fire. The sanctions now exercised
were mere planetary influences, and invented ones at that. If these
were to be effective, the interests of state religion, public order and
Academe clearly had to be intertwined. This may have assisted the
purposes of government but questions of natural truth were now
vulnerable since they risked becoming matters of appearance for the
sake of public order.
In fact, it is now known that the scientific purpose of the Aristotelian
system in the hands of the Alexandrian school which followed was to
‘save appearances’, 51 and that it also had theological connotations
which, if Strato’s stage-managed miracles are not misunderstood,
were attributable to a wholly invented divine control. Strato invented
the science of pneumatics, his knowledge of which he exploited to
counterfeit, in a variety of mysterious ways, the turning of water into
wine and the mysterious movements of idols across the altar, these
and other effects being designed to deceive the worshipper. It is no
accident therefore that in trying to account for the motions of the
planets over the sky, geometrical models were constructed with little
or no concern for whether they might be true!
The continuing failure to find a theory of the planetary system had
far-reaching effects of which the most serious was a strengthening of
the theological aspects of astronomy. Where Aristotle himself may
well have wished to treat the universe as a purely mechanical system
with only a Prime Mover as the solitary theological element, under
the influence of the Alexandrian school, every aspect of the heavens
tended to become an object of worship. Now, however, the heavenly
gods were not comets but planets. Moreover the critical phases of
human existence came to be ascribed to a remote action on the part
of these ‘new’ planetary gods, which was elaborated in terms of the
quite imaginary theoretical structure now know as horoscopic
astrology. Horoscopic and omen astrology were indeed quite
different. Whereas the latter began as an honest attempt to
anticipate the effects of real encounters between meteor streams and
our planet, the former was an attempt in the name of science to
confer realism on an imagined planetary process. Horoscopic
astrology eventually found its highest expression in the works of the
Alexandrian scholar Claudius Ptolemy (AD 100-165), known as the
Almagest and the Tetrabiblos, which is a systematic exposition of
astrology, regarded nowadays as an aberration outside the main
stream of science. But, of course, the physical picture was
fundamental; and it was not until the basically irrational character of
wholly invented astrological forces’ acting at a distance’ had been
uprooted by the Cartesian philosophers sixteen hundred years later,
in the wake of the exposure of Aristotle’s various misconceptions by
Copernicus, Bacon, Tycho, Kepler and Galileo, that any major new
advance in science and mathematics could be made. It is well
understood now that the long dominance of horoscopic astrology,
and the slow progress of science over this time, has its roots in the
failure of the Greek experiment with rationalism; what has not been
appreciated, until recently, however, is that in creating the planetary
gods, the Greeks also diverted attention from the catastrophic
actions of the real celestial gods as expressed in the oldest tales.
By the seventeenth century, despite misgivings on the part of the
Church, it was accepted amongst astronomers that there was a
definite need to simplify the system of concentric crystal spheres
carrying the planets and that it was necessary to put the Sun in the
middle. In order to explain the complexities of planetary motion,
Descartes replaced the whirling glass spheres with a Sun-centred
system of transparent fluid vortices in the heavenly ocean, an idea
which Newton subsequently endorsed and sought to express in
precise mathematical form: a theory for the planetary system did
then at last arrive. 52 From this juncture the writing was on the wall
for horoscopic astrology; further, with comets again in the celestial
domain and perceived as an impact hazard, there was once again a
basis for omen astrology and its catastrophic perception of the oldest
myths.
Indeed, as we shall see, the arrival of two bright comets in 1680 and
1682 almost shattered the carefully nurtured Aristotelian dream, and
there followed a period of considerable intellectual ferment. Newton
however saw a way out of the difficulty, and the brief opportunity for
a new understanding of ancient history passed. In its essentials,
Newton’s new-look Aristotelian scheme, in which the Earth moves
untroubled by some cosmic forces, has survived to the present day.
However, before we reach this phase, we have to understand how it
is that the Christian Church took on the Aristotelian banner.