
7 — Doomsday
The spasmodic disintegration of a particularly impressive comet,
then, could well have been responsible for a series of disasters in the
Mesopotamian and Egyptian civilizations during the third
millennium BC, and then again for a subsequent series of disasters
inflicted upon the Minoan and Mycenean civilizations during the
second millennium BC. Catastrophes of this sort, delivered by visible
celestial gods, are completely outside modern experience, but it is
clear - that they could have been a major reason for the
preoccupation with, and dread of, the sky manifested by the earliest
civilizations.
Conversely, by the middle of the first millennium BC (around the
time of Socrates), when these encounters had become less frequent,
the capacity of the visible cometary debris to do any harm must have
been called into question. It is plausible to suppose that in these
more quiescent circumstances a new outlook on the world would
come to the fore, one familiar to the modem era, in which moral
sanctions were now provided by civilizations themselves rather than
by way of thunderbolts hurled by the gods. Amongst those so
committed, the tendency must have been to assume that the world
was safe from celestial visitation.
At the same time old ideas die hard and it is also plausible to suppose
that the fundamental change of world-view enforced by the
appearance of the sky was not instantaneous and that it became a
source of conflict and debate. Indeed if the timescale of the debate
were comparable with that over which celestial activity reaching
some kind of peak during the centuries immediately before Christ
(see figure 4), such conflict and debate would be intensified, simply
delaying for a while any widespread conclusion that the world is safe.
This account of the course of cosmic events places the pre-and
postSocratic periods at Athens in a new light. Thus it is possible to
detect some degree of exasperation in Athens with the failure to
relinquish the old, mythical gods, so much so that Macedonian
aristocrats were caused to embrace a new, more impotent supernatural power and impose their will upon a vast new (Hellenic)
empire. Indeed the particular new view of the world which the
Macedonians espoused, in which the gods were a kind of image to be
exploited to the advantage of the state, almost certainly flourished
only because of their ability to defy their homeland and carve out
their own ‘brave new world’. Further, it was only a matter of time
before the rapidly expanding Roman Empire engulfed Greece and
Egypt and itself absorbed the new ‘world-view’.
Figure 4. diagrams illustrating the apparent enhancement of
fireball activity (a) during the late Babylonian period (based on
recovered ephemerides and monthly records on cuneiform
tablets); and (b) during the Chinese Tang dynasty (based on
recorded fireball and comet observations, where the commonest
fireball radiants during the eleventhcentury peak arise from the
Taurid meteor stream). In interpreting these apparent surges
account must be taken of variation in the attention given to the
sky by astronomers at different epochs (see also The Origin of
Comets by M.E. Bailey and the authors). Also relevant is the
location of astronomers, the increasing trend in the observed
number of comets per century apparently reflecting the spread
of professional astronomical practice from the Chinese (C) to the
Japanese (J) and Koreans (K) before the introduction of the
telescope (T).
It may be no coincidence that the periods immediately after Socrates
and Christ — after 450 and 0 BC respectively — saw the eventual
flowering of academies in Athens and Alexandria respectively, which
sought to provide an understanding of the natural world within the
constraints of a selected ‘world-view’. In each case, there was a
tendency to enforce the chosen world-view by strict adherence to
particular party lines. The centre of learning at Alexandria, for
example, right from the start, had a certain transatlantic opulence,
reflecting its status in this brave new world, and a deference to the
agreed cosmological view which was bound up with the stability of a
state controlled by a ruling oligarchy. To hold alternative views was
therefore to risk not just scientific error, but heresy. The state
increasingly assumed a new inquisitorial role.
The pressure to conform with the new Aristotelian world-view was
therefore very strong, and we may safely assume that most unwanted
history and ancient knowledge was relegated to the mythological
dustbin. No longer was there any significance in Atlantis, no longer
did bodies exist revolving in heaven that brought destruction to the
Earth at long intervals by a great conflagration. Eliminated also was
any vestige of the old dualism in the sky between the forces of good
and evil. All that remained eventually was an old benevolent Zeus,
underscored by Aristotle’s principle of order and harmony, the Prime
Mover, contending with a malevolent ‘necessity’ invented by Plato
and located here on Earth. According to theory therefore, all
movement and good had to be attributed to the Prime Mover whilst
sloth and evil were to be counted as fundamental aspects of matter
and human life, as necessary elements of the lowest level in the
cosmos. This combination of evil with human nature emerges now as
a fundamental notion, creating a facet of theology that seemed to be
in excellent accord with human experience. Indeed, the specially
invented new religion now emanating from Alexandria, the so-called
cult of Serapis, 53 was able to present itself in a new guise as an agent
of reform, an active missionary force on the side of good. In the
hands of an Alexandrian trained priesthood, armed with its
pantheon of planetary gods and stage-managed miracles, the temples
of Serapis spread widely throughout the Near East and looked set to
embrace the world!
It seems however that the cult of Serapis displayed rather too
obviously its aristocratic connections; it was perhaps too concerned
with imposing good habits and not enough with offering reward or
hope in a frightening world. In this respect the concern was still with
the seasonal flux of meteors and fireballs, and the anticipation of
catastrophe and world end. Prophets of doom, as of old, were still
prevalent. On the other hand, there were the commissioners of
organized religion who practiced horoscopic astrology and invoked
the new Aristotelian doctrines based upon the supposed influence of
the planets. Their concern was more with calming public fear and
expressing the essential good will of God. Based, it seems, on
formulae of apparently proven success, both the trappings of
organized religion and the fundamentals of theology throughout the
Near East seemed to develop a certain degree of uniformity:
monotheism, astral influences, miracle-working and so on.
Out of this melting pot, there emerged some kind of pattern, a
division of belief in the community between horoscopes and omens
polarized more or less along class lines. The upper and middle
classes seem to have favoured the more cerebral Hellenistic cults
whilst the lower orders remained with the more traditional beliefs.
This division may well explain why the struggle for supremacy
persisted for so long, but we must not overlook the influence of the
sky: 54 it is well known to us through Chinese records, also
supplemented by those of the Babylonians (figure 4(a)) and the
writings of classical authors, that there was a significant
enhancement of meteoric activity towards the end of the first
millennium BC, starting perhaps around 250 BC and continuing for
some decades into the following era as well. There were, it seems,
markedly increased expectations of an impending world-end at this
time which continued unabated for much longer than a century.
It was amongst members of the Christian cult that the expectation of
world-end emerged eventually with the greatest force. To follow this
development, we have to examine the evolution of ideas in one of the
countries closest to the centre of the Hellenic empire, namely
Judea. 55 Originally Judaic cosmology exactly mirrored that of
Greece and Egypt and was probably of Mesopotamian origin: here
too there was a flat earth with ‘waters’ above and below (figure 5);
here too there had been a great struggle in the sky between deified
figures, Behemoth and Leviathan; and here too, the dualism had
evolved until in the midsecond millennium BC, it was a wellintentioned Yahweh and a not-sowell-intentioned Satan who were in
contention. However, if there was a difference that eventually set
Judaism apart from other religions in the Near East, it was in the
fierceness of the attachment between Yahweh and his devotees. This
variation on an otherwise common theme arose amongst the Jews at
the time of their escape from Egyptian bondage when certain cosmic
forces were said to have wreaked destruction upon their
captors. 56 Hence-forth the Jews regarded Yahweh as their particular
protector and themselves as His chosen people.
The special relationship was deepened by the intense isolationist
policy of subsequent leaders. Nevertheless by the closing centuries of
the previous era, doctrine had divided, as it had at Athens and Rome,
along more or less devil-may-care (epicurean) and severe doomladen (stoic) lines, represented locally by the Pharisees and
Sadducees. Under the liberating influence of the Hellenic and Roman
domination however, there also emerged many prophet-led sects of
which the Mandean, Gnostic, Essene and Hermetic seem to have
been the most significant. Later, all reference to the teachings of
these sects was to be systematically suppressed, so it is difficult now
to get proper appreciation of their importance; authorities like
Josephus and Pliny for example, in the first century AD, gave them
only passing mention. Each sect however was characterized by
esoteric doctrines including the customary angelology, eschatology
and (omen) astrology, as well as a sacred literature.
The Essenes in particular appear to have drawn their doctrines from
a Mesopotamian source, bringing with them a Zoroastrian dualism
in which man was affected in equal measures by the sons of Light
and Darkness. Zoroastrianism was an important near-Eastern
religious movement in the middle of the first millennium BC,
ultimately of Iranian origin. Led by ‘magi’, it subscribed to Ahura
Mazda as the sole, benevolent creator of the Universe. It also
postulated primeval twin spirits, Spenta Mainyu (Good Mind) and
Angra Mainyu (Evil Spirit) with their respective angelic and demonic
followers in eternal conflict since the dawn of creation, and so had
many of the now familiar characteristics of older religions. There
were differences of emphasis, of course, and different names for the
gods, but there was plainly something of a common background
between the Judaic and Zoroastrian faiths.
Figure 5. Representations of the Judaic cosmos. Note the great
arch representing upper and lower heavens, the latter
corresponding to the path of the Sun and Moon. The windows in
this path appear to be associated with store-houses for the
winds, upper waters and hail (line drawing reproduced by kind
permission of Weidenfeld & Nicolson).
However, the specific role which the Essenes took upon themselves
was the study of ancient prophecies relating to the immediate future,
which historical evidence had convinced them were the longpredicted Last Times, not only the culmination of world history but
the antecedent of an incipient Golden Age. Thus convinced, they
produced a plan of action, or book of oracles, heavily laden with
astronomical detail, describing:
exactly how and in what order the sect must address itself to
deliberately bringing about the fulfillment of all the outstanding
biblical prophecies. In this way, all the conditions would be
fulfilled for the inauguration of the longawaited kingdom.
Everything therefore hinged upon the prophetic interpretation
of the individual teacher and his successors. With its aid there
now seemed to be every prospect that beleaguered mankind
could at last take the promised kingdom of heaven by storm. 57
As is well known, the belief that Jesus of Nazareth brought this
astronomically oriented programme to fruition was eventually
advanced with considerable success by the Christian sect of the
Essenes. Their argument that this birth and resurrection were
attended by heavenly portents is evidently no without significance,
particularly when one has regard to their special claim that Jesus was
possessed of divine qualities during his sojourn on earth. However
the posthumous failure of the Kingdom of Heaven to arrive was open
to misinterpretation and the later achievements of the Christian sect
owed much of their success to a subsequent reinteipretation of the
original programme by Paul of Tarsus. Taking his inspiration
apparently from a sign, which may be interpreted according to taste
as the occasion of a violent fireball or an epileptic fit, Paul modified
the Christian message along Aristotelian or Hellenic lines by
eliminating the anticipated conflagration and worldend.
Whatever significance we might like to place upon the Pauline
revelation, it is clear that one particular Aristotelian notion, that
meteor and comets were of terrestrial provenance, did not at this
time have general support. There was still a tendency, with which
Christian cosmology now came to be associated, to return these
objects to the celestial sphere. Not as a potential source of
destruction however, as the omen astrologers assumed, but as
purposeful signals from heaven. Paul thereby dissociated the earlier
messianic expectations from a catastrophic world-end and linked
them instead with a spell of suffering by the Son of God, identifies as
Jesus, during a predicted return to Earth. As we have already noted,
it was an old Babylonian idea that kingly suffering was necessary for
the sake of humanity as a whole. Admittedly there were difficulties in
accounting for many of the apocalyptic statements in the sacred
literature but there was usually sufficient ambiguity in a cosmic
messiah ‘who takest the clouds for thy chariot, riding on the wings of
the wind; who makest the winds thy messagers and flames of fire thy
servants’ not to undermine the revisionist thinking.
In this way Paul’s skilful blend of Judaism and Hellenism
successfully overcame the principal failing of Aristotelian theology,
namely its inability to explain the apparently astronomical signs
which were a source of despair to so many. By relating these signs to
the temporary presence of God on Earth, however indispensable
such an idea might appear on other grounds, the basis for confidence
in the future and hope, which already characterized Hellenism to
some degree, was strengthened still further. As a result, Christian
theology came to be seen by managers of State and Academe alike as
providing the soundest possible theoretical basis for natural, civil
and moral law. Through the eventual good offices of the Holy Roman
Empire, associated with divinity through the papal succession, the
Christian sect multiplied and during the first millennium AD became
the dominant force in Near Eastern and European religion.
And so, during a period of reduced meteoric activity in the first few
centuries of the present era, Christian theology began to be licked
into shape. If we examined the acrimonious and frequently violent
conflict that ensued, as different factions struggled for dominance, it
was the question of the divinity of Jesus that naturally emerged as
the most pressing issue. Any deviations from this basic principle,
which might have reduced Jesus to the level of a mere prophet (with
special skills in astrology!) were ruthlessly expunged. The dominance
of the Christian Church indeed came to rest more and more
assertively on the presumed divinity of Jesus and the continuing
association with this divinity through the papal succession. How this
succession was to work was hardly self-evident; but it was a principle
that any government involving an Athenian-styled ‘ecclesia’ needed
to insist on if it was to claim power through the sort of divine or
cosmic association that the Egyptian or Hellenic monarchies had
previously passed on through a dynastic succession. The process now
takes place behind closed doors and seems to be crucially attended
by a puff of smoke!
It is interesting that even this issue may not have been settled
automatically since there is some controversial evidence that the
Holy Roman Empire itself was forged only by absorbing and
suppressing various claimants to a Christian dynastic
succession. 58 Be this as it may, the survival of Christianity could
never be regarded as certain and much of its capacity to survive
through the second millennium AD has depended on the outcome of
several theoretical conflicts during the first millennium AD. For as
Christianity spread into northern Europe, it came increasingly in
contact with various forms of paganism each, as usual, carrying its
own angelology, eschatology and omen astrology developed to
varying levels of sophistication. Maybe these cults would have
capitulated more rapidly to Christianity, as others had done before,
had it not been that the sky degenerated again during the first
millennium AD.
The evidence then is of a Christian Church during the early centuries
AD that increasingly adopted a doctrine of the kind promulgated by
Paul as it moved closer to the sources of political power. However,
the continuing importance of the apocalyptic tradition in early
Christianity, millenarianism as it has come to be called, should not
be underestimated. Thus, apocalyptic ideas did not simply die out;
they persisted, and indeed by the end of the fourth century AD they
reached new levels of intensity throughout the whole underworld of
popular religion. It was largely due to these undercurrents that the
idea of the Saints of the Most High was revitalized to become a new
potent force in Christian circles just as the Patriarchs of old had
among the Jews. Also the idea of divine election re-emerged and
entered the Christian apocalyptic as well. Indeed, the body of
literature inaugurated by the Book of Revelation encouraged many
Christians to see themselves as the Chosen People of the Lord, that
is, chosen both to prepare the way for and to inherit the
millennium. 59
A contemporary expression of these ideas leaves one in little doubt as
to what was envisaged: it was that an Antichrist,
raging with implacable anger, will lead an army and besiege the
mountain where the righteous have taken refuge. And when they
see themselves besieged, they will call loudly to God for help,
and God shall hear them, and shall send them a Liberator. Then
the heavens shall be opened in a tempest, and Christ shall
descend with great power; and a fiery brightness shall go before
him, and a countless host of angels; and all that multitude of the
godless shall be annihilated, and torrents of blood shall flow ...
When peace has been brought about and every evil suppressed,
that righteous and victorious King will carry out a great
judgement on the earth of the living and the dead, and will hand
over all heathen peoples to servitude under the righteous who
are alive, and will raise the (righteous) dead to eternal life, and
will himself reign with them on earth, and will found the Holy
City, and this kingdom of the righteous will last for a thousand
years. Throughout that time, the stars shall be brighter, and the
brightness of the sun shall be increased, and the moon shall not
wane. Then the rain of blessing shall descend from God morning
and evening, and the earth shall bear all fruits without man’s
labour. Honey in abundance shall drip from the rocks, fountains
of milk and wine shall burst forth. The beasts of the forest shall
put away their wildness ... [and so on].
There are fanciful elements, of course, in this millennial vision, but
one is bound to wonder whether some underlying cosmic spectacle
was causing it. As Cohn points out, the forthcoming millennium was
so widely attractive ‘that no official condemnation could prevent it
occurring again and again to the minds of the under-privileged and
oppressed’, and the institutionalized Church needed to display ‘the
utmost skill in controlling and canalizing the emotional energies of
the faithful, particularly in directing hopes and fears away from this
life towards the next’.
Augustine in particular, during the fifth century, was to propound a
view of the millennium which later became official doctrine. In his
City of God, he argued that the Book of Revelation could be
understood as spiritual allegory whilst the millennium had already
arrived with the birth of Christianity and was indeed realized in the
existence of the Church. 60 He also presented the Church as a
defender of ancient tradition and as the sole dispenser of divine
essence (grace), thereby guaranteeing a formal role for the Church
hierarchy and its establishment, both maintaining an essential
cosmic connection and justifying the extension of its mission by
increasing the ‘card-carrying membership’. Nevertheless the fourth
and fifth centuries remained a period of deep schism within the
Church, revived paganism outside and intensified monastic
withdrawal. The evidence points all too clearly to human conduct as
a matter for general concern, driven it would appear, by a growing
fear that the heavens would indeed open up in a tempest. Inevitably
the rule of the establishment was either blamed or condoned,
abandoned or enforced, but the social fabric was torn apart all the
same: an age of massive migration ensued and a more or less total
lapse of central control. Barbarian incursions grew relentlessly,
slowly but surely sapping the strength of the Roman Empire until in
410 AD, Rome itself was to fall ignominiously to the Visigoths under
Alaric. By this time however, Europe was on the brink of another
Dark Age.
One of the most extraordinary documents of the Dark Age, written
some 130 years after the sack of Rome and the collapse of Roman
rule in Britain, is a tract due to the British priest Gildas. Entitled ‘De
excidio et conquest Britanniae’, it describes in broad historical
outline the course of events leading to what is called ‘the ruin of
Britain’. The tract is not primarily a historical document however
since Gildas’s main purpose was clearly to admonish his
contemporaries for standards of behavior that left much to be
desired, using recent past events to illustrate the likely course of
heavenly retribution to come. Indeed, as we shall see, the
contemporary period was one of strongly recurring meteor activity
while Gildas, greatly respected in his own time as a sage and by
historians such as Bede in centuries that followed, is now usually
regarded as the only contemporary writer who attempted, however
inadequately, a general survey of British history from the latter days
of Roman rule until the middle of the sixth century AD. 61
Remarkably, Gildas shows little interest in any part played by
AngloSaxons in the early stages of the collapse of Roman and subRoman authority, and indeed, when Saxons appear, it is not as
devastating raiders and invaders of Lowland Britain but as federate
allies settled there by the leader Vortigern to help defend the land
against incursions from the Piets and Scots. Furthermore, following
the changes in official doctrine introduced by Augustine, the Roman
Church was obliged to take very seriously certain heretical
tendencies in Britain, and we know from accounts of the visit to
Britain in the period before 440 AD by Germanus, the bishop of
Auxerre, to discuss these problems, that subRoman Britain was still a
force to be reckoned with and that Vortigern was in charge of a fairly
well-ordered regime. Soon afterwards, however, it is clear that this
regime suffered a quite exceptional reverse, the disaster being felt the
length and breadth of the land. The outburst, which was ‘the ruin of
Britain’, was marked apparently by widespread slaughter and
destruction. In this episode, whose duration is not specified, Gildas
deplores in particular the physical overthrow and ruin of towns, and
the massacre of Christian clergy, both decisive in bringing about a
virtually total liquidation of the most characteristic features of late
Roman urban civilization.
The problem for historians is 61 that Gildas writes of all this in
melodramatic phraselogy ‘employed deliberately’, it is said, ‘to create
the maximum impression’; yet it is also clearly recognized that
Gildas must here be treated as a witness of truth, for ‘it would have
been fatal to his argument and the aims of his tract to have described
in such terms a situation which his readers knew to have been quite
different’. Gildas reports on the events leading up to the catastrophe
of the ‘feathered flight of not unfamiliar rumour’ (the rumble of
incoming meteors, one wonders, reduced to subsonic speed), and of
the catastrophe itself that it was due to:
the fire of righteous vengeance, kindled by the sins of the past,
[which] blazed from sea to sea, its fuel prepared by the arms of
the impious from the east. Once lit it did not die down. When it
had wasted town and country in that area, it burnt out almost
the hole surface of the island, until its red and savage tongue
licked the western ocean ... All the greater towns fell to the
enemy’s battering rams; all their inhabitants, bishops, priests
and people, were mowed down together, while swords flashed
and flames crackled. Horrible it was to see the foundation stones
of towers and high walls thrown down bottom upwards in the
squares, mixing with holy altars and fragments of human bodies
... there was no burial save in the ruins of the houses, or in the
bellies of the beasts and the birds.
The rhetoric, for such it is commonly deemed to be, leaves little to
the imagination. On the other hand, the destruction in the towns, of
which Gildas speaks, was still evident a century later; there was a
desperate call to Aetius, the Roman leader in Gaul, for help; there
does appear to have been an official delegation to Britain soon after,
led once again by Germanus; and, subsequently, an exodus across
the Channel on such a scale as to justify the future name of Brittany.
The population of Britain did indeed plunge and the archaeological
record is one of extreme deprivation and bare subsistence living for a
generation or more thereafter. The scale of the disaster is not really
in doubt, therefore; and as Myres has pointed out, the evidence in
the future spoken language and in place-names over a substantial
chunk of Britain, extending from the Midlands to East Anglia,
demonstrates that the previous Roman and sub-Roman civilization
was completely wiped out. The evidence in the soil, moreover, is of a
still heavily wooded countryside before this period which seems to
have experienced drastic deforestation over a fairly short interval of
time. Such evidence is not inconsistent with the picture of sudden
and widespread conflagration described by Gildas.
There is further physical and documentary evidence, also, of a sharp
deterioration in global climate in the aftermath of these events. The
northern treeline in Canada and Scandinavia receded by a hundred
miles or so (figure 2), whilst the Annales Cambriae speaks of days as
dark as night in AD 444 or AD 447, consistent also with Gildas’s
reported failure in the production of wine. In the history of Northern
Britain, too, recounted much later by Nennius, there is mention that
Germanus made another visit after the disaster, but there are curious
and unexplained references to the destruction of Vortigem’s fortress
‘by fire sent from heaven [as] the fire of heaven burned’.
Other literary sources of less certain pedigree speak of Vortigern,
who had previously consulted his magi (astronomers) and
withdrawn to his fortress, actually perishing during this incident. We
would not then expect the official delegation from Gaul to have any
subsequent contact with Vortigern and indeed it is reported that
Germanus was received by a certain Elaphius who was said to be ‘the
first man of the district’. The latter, in view of the destruction of
central authority in the land and of the destitute state of the
population and countryside, might well under these circumstances
have been persuaded as to the merits of a mass exodus across the
Channel to relieve the immediate hardship in Britain whilst also
providing much needed reinforcement for Roman Gaul against the
recurring threats from Visigoths and Huns. But as the exodus went
ahead, it seems that the former allies and mercenaries of AngloSaxon
origin were reappearing in Britain to claim settlements rights that
were said to have been agreed previously with Vortigern. Such hints
as there may be in this course of events of a heaven-sent force which
effectively ruined Britain, argue in favour of a celestial rather than an
Anglo-Saxon agency for ‘the fire of righteous vengeance’ cited by
Gildas. Indeed the ‘battering rams’ which he also cited, in their Latin
equivalent, are ‘aries’, a term with obvious connotations relating to
stars as much as sheep (see also chapter 1), even to the extent of a
specific association with the largest known cosmic swarm (chapter
10). Commentators in China and Spain, it is worth noting, also
record an unusual observation of a ‘strange comet’ in 441 AD.
Subsequent reports on the continent of a sequence of events leading
to a disaster in Britain before 442 are in fact now seen as making
quite exaggerated claims for successful invasion by the Anglo-Saxons
at this time. However they may justifiably be seen as evidence that
piratical opportunists were seeking to establish footholds in Britain.
Thus, although the Anglo-Saxon dominance of Britain from this time
was once accepted as fact, the evidence can now be understood as
pointing to a cosmic catastrophe unrelated to continental invaders
and subsequently, during the latter half of the fifth century and the
first half of the sixth, of a Celtic Britain which was restored to
something of its former strength by members of the nobility,
returned from Gaul (cf. Table 2).
Indeed the main Anglo-Saxon invasion taking over Britain is now
seen as having occurred at least a century later than the catastrophe,
at a time which corresponds to the earliest known returns, according
to the calculations of the German astronomer Klinkerfues, 62 of
intense meteor showers due to Comet Biela (chapter 9). The
tendency in Britain five centuries later, when Anglo-Saxon overlords
were replaced by a new generation of nobles from northern Gaul, to
hanker after glorious A it hu rain age in which an ancient celestial
figure in the form of Merlin also commanded great respect, does then
become more comprehensible as evidence of a presumed, also
greatly feared, celestial influence during the Dark Age.63 Indeed a
Dark Age whose aspiring kings were much given to heading their
genealogies with celestial gods, in general accordance with a still
widely accepted principle of divine election (cf. plate 18), is likewise
the more comprehensible. It is an interesting question, in fact,
whether the whole of the first millennium AD should be understood
in terms of a crusading ethic amongst the divinely elected, inspired
by celestial events, first settings Anglo-Saxons inter alia on the
move, only to be replaced by the Vikings in due course.
Later, the exploits of the Vikings were on a grandiose scale,
embracing the whole of Europe. 64 But they grew out of a Dark Age
already centuries long and our knowledge of their origins is very
sparse. The best documented of the Viking raids, and also the earliest
recorded in the west, is the plundering and destruction in 793 of the
church and monastery on the tiny defenceless island of Lindisfarne.
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle states that terrifying omens — lightning
and flying dragons — which were witnessed that year were followed
by famine, and that shortly after these dolorous events, in June,
heathens fell upon the island community and pillaged God’s house
there. During the restorations of the twelfth-century priory on
Lindisfarne, archeologists found a curious carved stone apparently
dating from soon after the assault on the earlier monastery and
illustrating the dreadful event. On one side of the stone were carved
the various cosmic symbols, the Cross, the Sun and the Moon, God’s
hands, and worshippers at prayer. On the other side the attackers are
seen, swinging their swords and battleaxes as they advance in single
file, dressed outlandishly in thick jerkins and narrow trousers:
invaders perhaps who were preceded by ‘the full flame’? The Vikings
consciously saw themselves apparently as marauders who pounced
from concealed positions, as if from creeks or caves, supposing the
etymology of the word is understood, but to Spaniards they were
‘heathen wizards’, to Germans they were ‘ashmen’. There are strange
associations here that have not been explained. Historians indeed
have not even remarked on the dramatic increase in the flux of
meteor storms and fireballs during this period, although we have
good records of events in the sky from the Chinese astrologers.
This renewed activity in the sky evidently reached its maximum
during the eleventh century AD, the peak coinciding, by chance, with
the conspicuous reappearance of a bright comet in 1066 (see plate 9).
Inevitably, warrior kings, builders of vast keeps in the style of an
earlier Mycenean age, would relate their rise to power to such signs
from heaven whilst the Christian Church would draw upon the
resources of the people in raising huge cathedrals and other places of
worship, still modeled paradoxically on the pagan cosmos, in
preparation for the ‘millennium’.
At this time too, it is reported quite specifically by nearcontemporary
historians in the ‘Recueil des historiens des Croisades’ that Pope
Urban 11 convened the Council of Clermont in November 1095 for
the purposes of authorizing the First Crusade, with all the
farreaching consequences that it set in train, immediately following a
violent meteor storm: 65
In the time of the emperor Henry IV ... according to the prophecies
in the Gospels, everywhere nation arose against nation and kingdom
against kingdom; and there were great earthquakes in divers places,
and pestilences and famines and terrors from heaven and great
signs. And because already in all nations the The resilience of
crusading Christian theology was thus once again tested, and seemed
to ride high on the renewed fears of Doomsday and worldend. 66 Indeed, during the centuries that followed this meteoric
spasm, the Christian Church maintained its power, but as the sky
ceased once again to be important, the Church moved to embrace
Aristotelian principles rather more readily than the feudal warlords
who presumably still depended on signs from heaven to underpin
their kingships and influence. Thus in the wake of the Arthurian age
and the decline of Merlin, for such the millennial meteoric spasm
appears to have been, the Christian Church centred on Rome enjoyed
its period of maximum influence. But in due course, yet again, in the
fourteenth century, strange portents in the sky (chapter 1) and an
inclement climate seem to have re-emerged to add to the plight of
mortals on earth. It is no surprise that, in the respite that
followed — the European Renaissance so-called — the authority of
the Church and the fundamental nature of the cosmos should once
again be questioned.
Plate 9. Perspective on Halley’s Comet, (a) As represented on the
Bayeux tapestry, during its 1066 apparition (Tapisseric de
Bayeux et avec autorisation special de la Ville de Bayeux). (b)
Crowned with great horns? As photographed from Mt Wilson
Observatory during its 1910 apparition, (c) The nucleus during
its 1986 apparition, photographed by the European Giotto
spacecraft (by kind permission of Dr H. U. Keller, Max Planck
Institut fur Aeronomie, Lindau/Harz, FRG. CD MPAE, 1986).
The nucleus is an extremely black, rotating object with
dimensions about 16 X 10X9 kilometres. The tail of the comet is
made up of gas and dust ejected in jets from a few active areas
on the surface of the nucleus. During a close encounter with a
brilliant comet, individual jets would be seen, creating a spiral
or possibly even a swastika in the sky (cf. plate 19). [Thus] when
it was God’s will and pleasure to free the Holy Sepulchre [at
Jerusalem], in which his son had lain for the sins of men, from
the power of the evangelical trumpet was sounding the coming
of the Last Judge, the universal Church beheld throughout the
whole world the portents in prophetic signs ... pagans and to
open the way to Christians desiring to travel there for the
redemption of their souls, he showed many signs, powers,
prodigies and portents to sharpen the minds of Christians so
that they should want to hurry there. For the stars in the sky
were seen throughout the whole world to fall towards the earth,
crowded together and dense, like hail, or snowflakes. A short
while later a fiery way appeared in the heavens; and then after
another short period half the sky turned the colour of blood.