
8 — Felony Compounded
The road from Ptolemy to Copernicus was thirteen hundred years
long, and in all that time scarcely a new idea found its way into
astronomy. The Academy at Athens was closed whilst that at
Alexandria was stultified by ideology, the Great Library eventually
being burned to the ground, either by Christian fanatics or Arab
conquerors. The goal of unifying physics and astronomy, already
something of a charade in Ptolemy’s time, had become a remote
prospect. However, following centuries of which it could be said ‘All
curiosity is at an end after Jesus, all research after the Gospel. Let us
have Faith, and wish for nothing more’, the opportunity to rethink
seems again to have been at hand.
Remnants of Greek science eventually found their way to the new
medieval universities of Europe by way of the Arab kingdoms of
Spain and Sicily (plate 10), and something of the way in which the
Greeks first came to study the planets seems to have been
reconstructed. More significantly perhaps, through institutions
provided by the medieval Church, a tradition of scholarly teaching
and study came to be revived. By the middle of the thirteenth
century, indeed, Thomas Aquinas was arranging that the Aristotelian
system was once again theoretically wedded to Christian theology, so
ensuring that any future reconstruction of physics outside
Aristotelian or Ptolemaic lines would not be a task for the fainthearted.
Despite this, there were aspects of Aristotelian cosmology that
continued to worry the purists; particularly the central position of
the Earth and the location and status of comets. For example in the
fifteenth century the German cardinal Nicolas of Cusa, in his treatise
On Learned Ignorance, disputed the Aristotelian idea that space
could be bounded by an outermost sphere; and if there was no
boundary to space, how could there be a centre? Earth, Sun or Moon
could be imagined at the centre of the universe arbitrary. And if the
universe had no centre to which motions could be referred, why
should the Earth not be considered in motion?
Plate 10. A Muslim astronomer observing a comet with a
quadrant (Topkapi Sarayi Museum Library).
Such questions had not been properly settled and around the middle
of the second millennium AD, Copernicus (1473-1543) indicated that
perhaps the Sun should be placed in the middle. The concept of a
central Sun should be placed in the middle. The concept of a central
Sun was at first deflected by the Church: thus an arrangement by one
Osiander ensured that Copernicus’ work was prefaced with an
unsigned disclaimer stating that the new idea was merely a
mathematical device for the purposes of easy computation, and not
the physical truth. The Church, Roman and Protestant, had little
difficulty therefore in suppressing this new idea and later attempts to
revive it led to Bruno (1548-1600), in the hands of the Inquisition,
being burned at the stake and Galileo (1564-1642) being placed
under house-arrest. However, within a century of the death of
Copernicus, the simplicity of the new system as against the
complexity of the old was beginning to tell. 67
It was the careful observations of the Danish astronomer Tycho
Brahe which eventually rendered necessary a radical change. The
ground had been prepared by the appearance, in 1572, of a brilliant
star in the sky (known now to have been a supernova), which was
hard to reconcile with the perfect, unchanging sky of Aristotle. A
great comet then appeared in 1577 and Tycho, by careful
observations, was able to show that even at its nearest approach to
Earth, the comet was still well beyond the Moon, contrary to the
Aristotelian view that comets were mere atmospheric phenomena. It
was still conceivable, of course, that comets were indicators of divine
intention, and indeed the appearance of this comet unleashed much
sermonizing and writing of blood-curdling tracts, but those of the
time who were less eshatologically inclined were now able to take a
more prosaic view. 68 Kepler, for example, simply assumed comets
were sweeping past the Solar System in straight lines while Galileo
treated them as mere optical illusions!
The latter was not a particularly tenable point of view on any account
and we find Newton (1642-1726), somewhat later, preferring the
Keplerian assumption: not out of conservatism, as it happens, but
because he wished to avoid comet encounters doing any damage to
the Solar System as he perceived it. Thus Newton (plate 11), like
Aristotle before him, considered the Solar System to be a divine
creation, set to run like a clockwork machine; and stray comets
passing through obviously put the system very much at risk. 69
Plate 11. Sir Isaac Newton (Mansell Collection
In 1680, however, another important comet was observed. Its path
across the sky was accurately tracked by the Astronomer Royal,
Flamsteed, at Greenwich. The orbit of this comet was shown to be,
not a straight line, but a parabola coming within the planetary
system. It says something for Newton’s understanding of gravity at
this stage that he did not treat the parabola as an illustration of his
gravitational law. In fact, he at first refused to believe Flamsteed’s
observation and only later came to regard the orbits of comets as
another aspect of the divinely ordained law of gravity, and the latter
as universal. But with a subtle change of emphasis, Newton now
insisted that encounters of comets with planets should be seen as
providential rather than catastrophic events, the means whereby the
planets were occasionally revitalized. Very little attention has been
paid to this interesting circumvention of Newton’s but its impact on
science has in some respects been almost as significant as that of his
law of gravity. Let us follow the matter a little further.
Newton was, of course, not alone in reflecting on these questions and
by this time the possibility of a disaster through cometary impact on
the Earth had become a matter for general debate. That the Earth’s
axis had shifted in the past due to the close approach of a comet was
accepted as a serious proposition. A future encounter, it was thought,
might bring the world to an end through overheating it. Scholars
seriously discussed whether the conflagration of Phaethon and the
flood of Duecalion or Ogyges had been caused by a celestial body.
The flood of Ogyges was noted for example as having been attributed
to the arrival of a comet Typhon, and there was also a Biblical
connection for Roman historians had declared the plagues of Egypt
to be a contemporary event. Such issues as whether the floods of
Noah. Ogyges and Deucalion were one and the same were also
raised, and the outcome of all these enquiries was a growing interest
in terrestrial catastrophism and ancient chronology. On the one
hand, it seemed that historical studies might help to determine the
periods of recurring comets, and on the other, it seemed that
periodic returns might be used as a celestial clock to plot the course
of major historical events, the epochs for example of Abraham,
Moses and Christ.
Then, by chance, another comet appeared in 1682. Halley was one of
the first to note that its orbit was that of the comets of 1531 and 1607:
a celestial clock had been found. This particular comet was to take
Halley’s name in due course (following its predicted return in 1758)
but Halley’s more immediate interest was in deriving a period for the
1680 comet. A value of 575 years was obtained, incorrect as it
happens, which William Whiston (Newton’s successor in the chair of
mathematics at Cambridge) made use of in calculating earlier
apparitions. This quite fictitious orbital period had the comet
returning at the time of Caesar’s death in 44 BC, and an earlier
return was supposed also to coincide with Noah’s flood in 2342 BC.
Whiston’s book describing these researches, dedicated to Newton,
rapidly came to be seen by clerics and nature philosophers alike as a
major step forward in the advancement of knowledge. Seemingly for
the first time, observational science and received Biblical knowledge
were in excellent accord. It was a history of catastrophe moreover,
and the day of judgement could even be at hand.
Whiston did not rest on his laurels, however. He thought the course
of events simply requited a more matter-of-fact interpretation of the
Bible, and he tended to play down the role played by Christ. Thus,
although Jesus’s standing as a prophet could be secure, his divine
attributes seemed again open to question. This was too much for
most of Whiston’s contemporaries, who saw this as an attempted
revival of the heretical doctrine known as Arianism, and the clerical
establishment soon sought to distance itself from Whiston. In the
meantime Newton, boxed in by these new implications of comets,
took it upon himself to emphasize again what he now claimed to be
the fundamental role of comets, namely their ability to deposit new
material on the stars and planets and their potential for doing good
to the Earth. The calm voice of reason was speaking. Scaremongering
was naturally added to the list of Whiston’s faults and it was not long
before he was dismissed from his post. The message was clear: the
Earth was not to be disturbed.
There is evidence that Newton was in fact well aware of the
catastrophic potential of comet impacts. These did not, however, fit
easily into his clockwork, predetermined universe, and he never
publicly raised the issue. Whether we should accuse Newton of
dissembling over the issue is perhaps uncertain but there is no
question that many who followed Newton, in England especially,
were soon eagerly endorsing the harmless role of comets, now that
they were seen to obey mechanical laws and could no longer be
regarded as signs from Heaven.
The return of Halley’s Comet in due course, in accord with
gravitational law, merely served to reinforce the new paradigm — as
also did Lexell’s comet years later. This comet passed the Earth
without exerting any noticeable change on the planet’s orbit. This
was good evidence that comets were very much smaller than planets,
thereby diminishing still further any lingering concern over their
menace. By the end of the eighteenth century, then, Newton’s public
view of comets had gained considerably in strength and we find
William Herschel, George III’s astronomer, putting forward the
opinion that comets were to be taken as interstellar objects purposely
weaving their way among the stars including the Sun. with the
specific intention of replenishing their fuel, and if necessary,
planetary life as well. Newton’s theory had therefore developed
rather successfully into an all-embracing cosmological view of some
permanence and continuity.
The new discoveries of meteorites and asteroids at the beginning of
the nineteenth century might have disturbed the status quo by
raising the spectre of celestial hazard. In the early decades of the
nineteenth century also, Comet Biela was seen to break up and
intense meteor showers appeared in 1832 and 1833. The latter
shower, seen in North America, led to surprise, panic, terror and a
widespread belief that the Day of Judgement was near. 70 There was
at this time also a revival of catastrophist views especially among
scientists of the French Academy.
However, the revival was short-lived. The generally small sizes of the
meteorites and the apparent confinement of the asteroids to a belt
between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter must have allayed any fears.
Further, by the middle of the nineteenth century, there was a
growing realization that many comets in short-period orbits rapidly
decayed under the influence of heat from the Sun into harmless
streams of dust. Indeed it seemed that Nature was able to cooperate
with Man by turning comets into dust which fed into the atmosphere
to be witnessed always as shooting stars. Comets were thus harmless
again and there was even a growing appreciation that they were
probably not interstellar, as Herschel had supposed, but had always
belonged to the Solar System.
The Universe was thus beginning to seem again a rather cosy affair,
the Sun pre-eminent in space and the Earth on a sort of eternal
merrygo-round, with the good fortune to be entertained from time to
time by firework displays against the background of more permanent
stars. By the middle of the last century, therefore, Newton’s longestablished theory of comets appeared to have been vindicated:
celestial portents had been well and truly tamed, and the benevolent
cosmos of Aristotle and Paul had been reconstructed.
Within about a hundred years of the period which we now call the
Enlightenment, a situation had emerged in which simple
mathematical laws (those of motion and gravity) appeared to govern
absolutely the forces of Nature. Such a situation was unprecedented
and was the basis of the singular confidence of nineteenth-century
physical scientists and Victorian society generally. Admittedly, if one
were to examine the details, there were difficulties with the
mechanical aether which was supposed to transmit waves of light as
well as the forces of gravity, but the solution of these particular
difficulties was widely assumed to be just a matter of patience and
time. The mechanisms involved were, it was thought, likely to be
simple and could fall easily into place once there was a proper grasp
of all the experimental phenomena. With our knowledge today of all
the surprises yet in store and of all the great upheavals in physics
that were to come, 71 it is difficult perhaps to grasp the real feeling of
mastery over the forces of Nature that prevailed in the nineteenth
century. This feeling also extended to the astronomical environment
in view of the latter’s presumed harmless character arising from
Newton’s theories. Thus, while gravity could be seen to pervade the
universe and provide a smooth undercurrent of physical control over
the behavior of matter, it was also possible so far as comets were
concerned to draw a clear demarcation between the unharmed Earth
on the one hand and the non-interventionist cosmos on the other.
The impact of this revitalized Aristotelian arrangement was far
greater than is often realized these days; for never before had there
been created such an impression of security in relation to the
astronomical surroundings. The new benevolent cosmos
underwritten by Newtonian laws could even now be interpreted as
the ultimate triumph of a tranquil Christian tradition over fiercer
Judaic ones and those of presumed lessenlightened faiths.
There are tempting parallels here between the British Empire at its
zenith and its Hellenic predecessor. In both cases the world was, in
some sense, under control. Certainly Victorian society had its
chartist movement, an unpopular monarchy, great inequality of
wealth and so on, whilst the Hellenic kingdoms were frequently at
war with each other; nevertheless in both cases a sense of confident
control over destiny seems to have pervaded these societies. And in
both cases the universe was understood as a more or less noninterventionist backdrop to the affairs of the Earth. It may be no
accident that, like its Hellenic predecessor, an empire at its zenith
should have provided the setting within which the universe was to be
so understood, and no suiprise that earth scientists and biologists
now felt free to explain terrestrial and biological evolution
unhindered by any thought of external interference.
In like manner, historians and sociologists began to look to purely
human factors dominating the course of historical events. The belief
can also be found in classical times, being held for example by the
ancient historian Thucydides. But now a sharp division of interest
emerged between those who explored the human one, the latter
secure in the knowledge that, apparently, any external influence had
finally been removed. This division into ‘two cultures’ evidently has
no valid foundation and there is some awareness that it causes
substantial damage in the educational and economic spheres at least.
What is not understood is that in addition, by supposing the affairs
of Earth to take place in splendid isolation, in an irrelevant cosmos,
the massive hazards which mankind may face from the astronomical
environment have in effect been programmed out of public
consciousness.
Of course, this argument is a gross simplification and a partial
caricature, but it is possible to wonder nevertheless whether our
distorted view of history today has not unleashed on western
civilization such a sense of superiority that we spurn the sky and put
our future in peril. Certainly we cannot escape the fact that the loss
of a cosmic perspective arising out of Newton’s fundamental thinking
has now penetrated more or less every branch of learning to the
extent that it goes largely unrecognized. For example, there is a
widespread and mistaken view nowadays, especially among earth
scientists and Biblical fundamentalists, that the issue of
catastrophism in Earth history was decided at this epoch, the middle
of the nineteenth century, by geologists and biologists debating the
forces of natural selection and the nature of geological change. In
fact, the uniformitarian framework had already been agreed by
astronomers, as we have seen, and it had simply become a matter of
convincing oneself that contemporary terrestrial processes were
enough to explain evolutionary change, as revealed for example by
the fossil record. Admittedly catastrophists like Buckland and Cuvier
opposed the trend but the debate was short-lived. As it happens, the
geologist Lyell and the natural historian Darwin, and their followers,
took the lead over this issue because they were not particularly
bound by any Biblical or physical conventions regarding the age of
the Earth; but insofar as they needed support for the slow action of
virtually undetectable forces, the physical scene had already been set.
Over the century or so following the publication of Darwin’s theory of
evolution, catastrophism lost all respectability. From time to time,
attempts were made to revive what might be called ‘Biblical’
catastrophism, the idea that astronomical disasters have occurred on
Earth in historical times. One such attempt was published in 1823 by
the German linguist Radlof (plate 12). This was 127 years after
Whiston’s New Theory of the Earth, and 36 years before Darwin’s
Origin of Species. At the time Radlof wrote, only four asteroids had
been discovered in the large gap between the orbits of Mars and
Jupiter, but it was widely thought that they were the remnants of a
planet which had exploded and that numerous fragments would
eventually be found. Radlof developed a hypothesis which was both
consistent with the scientific knowledge of the day and also seemed
to account for the ancient tales of catastrophe. According to him, a
large planet in orbit between Mars and Jupiter was shattered by
collision with a comet. One fragment, Phaethon, struck the Earth,
giving rise to tales of celestial battle in which the monster Typhoeus
was hurled to Earth. Another fragment became the planet Venus,
undergoing close encounters with Mars on its way in to its present
orbit.
Sixty years later, world end traditions were again similarly
interpreted by the Irish American politician Donnelly. His book
Ragnarok: the Age of Fire and Gravel , published in 1883, created a
considerable stir when it came out. In it, Donnely argued that the
Earth had had a close encounter with a comet, which had left its
mark in the form of extensive gravel and till deposits in America and
Europe.
The most famous (or notorious) of the ‘Biblical’ catastrophists, again
in America, was Velikovsky, the author of Worlds in Collision, who in
1950, from his studies of ancient tales, revived the old notion that a
comet had shifted the Earth’s axis, and even resurrected Radlof s
notion that the planet Venus had hurtled past the Earth around 1500
BC, flinging Mars around in the process. There were differences of
detail: whereas Radolf had Venus as a planetary fragment flung out
of the asteroid belt, Velikovsky had it thrown out of Jupiter. Time,
however, had marched on: what was perhaps seen as tenable in 1823
was now patently absurd in 1950. The decline of catastrophism, as a
serious proposition, was complete.
Plate 12. Frontispiece of Radlof’s book, published in 1823.
Hesperus and Phaethon, in which historical catastrophes were
related to the fragmentation of an asteroid (by kind permission
of the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh).
It is interesting to note that the Biblical catastrophists were all
‘outsiders’ of one sort or another. Radlof was at first regarded by his
contemporaries as a brilliant linguist, but as his ideas departed more
and more from the mainstream so he became more and more
isolated, and he died in obscurity, even the date of his death being
unknown. Donnelly was regarded as a talented orator and statesman,
but he seemed unable to toe any party line for long and his
increasingly maverick opinions ensured that his political career was
ultimately a failure. Velikovsky was a psychiatrist who had studied
under Freud, but whose incursion into the domain of astronomers
was to prove an intellectual disaster.
What is significant in the Velikovsky affair is not so much his
scientific proposition, which is an easy target, as the vitriolic reaction
of the American astronomical community to it. Little attempt was
made by the critics to evaluate the historical information; that there
might be more things in heaven and earth than was apparent in the
astronomy of 1950, that Velikovsky and his predecessors might
however dimly have been detecting the signal of real events in the
noise of ancient myths, does not seem to have occurred to them:
celestial portents had been more than just tamed, they had become
unthinkable.
We have now traced the labyrinthine story of mankind’s reactions to
the events in the sky. We have seen how preoccupation with the sky,
and fear of it, was an integral part of the earliest civilizations. There
was a clear perception that catastrophe might from time to time be
visited on the Earth from above. But as the gods faded from the
zodiac there was, inevitably, a shift of perception. A downgrading of
comets as celestial portents was both politically opportune, and
philosophically necessary if the theory of a perfect sky was to hold.
Of course, the linkages between religion, government and philosophy
are part of the complex stuff of history, and our working out of the
above view in earlier chapters is inevitably simplistic. But if there is a
kernel of truth in the proposition that environments
interact — natural, intellectual and political — then it cannot be
avoided that exciting performances from the sky, occasionally
associated with something like a nuclear impact, will generate a
particular view of the world, and that the decay of these
performances will leave that world-view high and dry. Likewise, if
there is a kernel of truth in the proposition that meteors were once
frequently recognized demons, with a not wholly unpredictable role
to play in the incidence of weather and disease as well as in the
survival of ‘chosen people’, then, nor can it be avoided that a
particular, seemingly plausible, view of the world will in due course
be seen as dealing only in natural magic and occult virtues. The
surprise, of course, is that there may be more realism in the hidden
forces of medieval magic than there may be in some of the physical
concepts now advanced within a modern scientific rationale.
We have seen how an ancient belief in swarms of wandering bodies
that would sometimes emerge to strike the Earth gave way in postAristotelian times to the nonsensical idea that planetary
conjunctions were of significance for life on Earth. Modern
newspapers, presumably guided by editors with a preponderantly
classical education, sublimely unaware of both earlier and later
developments, still persist in presenting this perverse from of
astrology, involving horoscopes, to the twentieth-century public. We
have seen how in the eyes of Christian apologists determined to root
out apocalypse, comets ceased to be material objects and became
celestial signs free for the expert to interpret. Several times over the
last two millennia, phenomena from the sky were seen to threaten
world-end: once at the beginning of the present era (2000 BC-AD
100), again during the first millennium (AD 350-450, AD 550-650,
AD 800-1100) and then again, albeit less impressively, perhaps three
times during the present one (around AD 1350-1450, AD 1650 and
the early decades of the last century). Several times, the apparent
threat lingered for centuries, paradoxically adding weight to the
Christian myth. Then, towards the end of the medieval period, as the
Christian logic appeared to falter, there was an opportunity to
reassess the question of the interaction between the Earth and its
environment. But the Christian grip was strong and Newton, like
Aristotle, had his subtle vision of perfection which carried great
influence. He claimed not to ‘deal in conjecture’; and the way
forward, perceived as such to the present day, was to build on the
secure mathematical foundation of his laws. We have seen how his
revelations of cosmic security and cosmic law were to be the lynchpins around which twentieth-century science revolved.
But now, the space age has arrived, riding on scientific laws, and the
importance of past impact cratering on planetary surfaces has been
recognized. The extent of the asteroidal population is also now being
revealed. These and other discoveries are now being put together as
cause and effect. Most the evidence, as we shall see, indicates that
asteroids are probably defunct cometary material and that their
supply into the central region of the Solar System is maintained by
the intermittent flux of giant comets from a comet cloud surrounding
the planetary system. 72 The implication is that swarms of asteroids
periodically exist in Earth-crossing orbits and that these are
responsible for producing an erratic sequence of cosmic winters
sudden coolings of the globe.
There have in fact probably been at least two successful and several
more aborted cosmic winters during the last five thousand years. The
strength and epoch of the next such global cooling cannot be
calculated at the moment because the celestial body or bodies likely
to cause it has (or have) not yet been detected by astronomers. In
fact there is little interest in a search, although the effects of such an
encounter may be broadly as horrific as those of a nuclear war. As
always, the unthinkable becomes the excuse for not looking.
Some lemmings, a story has it, rush over cliffs. Others, with the
successful breeding of two thousand years, just sit on a globe and
wait.