
II — THE BULL OF HEAVEN
9 — Celestial Mechanics
To the casual observer on a clear dark night, away from city lights,
the stars appear as points of light on a huge dark dome. Stretching
across this celestial vault, there is a broad, irregular band of light
known as the Milky Way, a river or path over which, in earliest times,
were said to have trodden ghosts, pilgrims, souls and many other
creatures of the mind. Binoculars reveal the Milky Way to be made
up of myriads of stars. The Sun is one such star and it would only
have to be moved ten or twenty light years away to be completely lost
appearances, the latter is a mighty disc some 100,000 light years
average just a few light years apart. The whole system is now known
as the Galaxy and it happens that the Sun is immersed within it close
to the central plane and some 25 light millennia from its central
nucleus.
To get a better idea of what these huge distances mean, we can scale
down the dimensions of the galactic disc to those of a large city such
as Greater London; its thickness is then about 200 metres and the
average distance between stars is about a foot. On this scale, the
planetary system is only about a third of a millimeter across; and we
can readily see that the Galaxy is largely empty space. If the age of
the Galaxy, which is about ten thousand million years, is similarly
compressed into one year, the Sun and its planets are less than 5
months old whilst the dramas of the present ice age have been acted
out only during the last 15 seconds of the year. To some degree then,
our environment is simply a matter of perspective: the astronomer
tends to see the Earth as a tiny vulnerable speck drifting with the Sun
in a huge galactic wilderness; the geologist tends to see it as a
massive self-contained globe evolving under the influence of strong
internal forces; whilst the historian tends to see it as an inert
platform, without relevance to the performances that are staged on
it.
The vast astronomical distances tend to give one a misleading
impression of the activity in the Universe however. The stars and
planets are in fact in a continual state of motion under the influence
of gravitational fields but in the case of stars, the distances are so
great that very little is perceptible to the naked eye. Planets on the
other hand are much closer and appear correspondingly more active,
their orbital periods being measured in years. Now, a planet orbiting
their orbital periods being measured in years. Now, a planet orbiting
a solitary Sun would continue in an unchanging elliptical orbit
forever. It is not so obvious however whether this simple state of
affairs would continue in the real world. Thus, while planets disturb
each other through their mutual gravitational attractions, and there
are small deviations from perfect ellipticity, the cumulative effect of
these changes is known to be extremely small over periods of several
million years, so the stability of the Solar System planets is
mathematically assured over these timescales. Beyond that, opinion
about the stability of planetary orbits is based on physical rather
than mathematical insight. For example it has been
calculated 73 that, if the Earth were to move closer to the Sun by
about 5 per cent, a ‘runaway greenhouse’ effect would set in,
generating an unstable rise in the Earth’s temperature to the extent
that the oceans would boil. On the other hand, a 10 per cent
movement in the other direction would freeze them solid. In either
case it is probably reasonable to suppose that life on Earth would
come to an end. These are tight tolerances and suggest that the
Earth’s orbit has not changed very much over the last billion years or
so. It is likely also that a large change in the shape of the Earth’s orbit
would give extremes of climate probably beyond the ability of life
forms to survive. These are reassuring arguments: one does not need
to worry about whether the Earth might be flung into the Sun or into
interstellar space, or whether it might find itself on a collision course
with Venus. At first sight then astronomers are in a position to agree
with geologists and historians regarding the seemingly harmless
nature of the astronomical environment. Everything indeed would be
fine were it not for a single discordant fact — the existence of comets.
The outermost planet of the Solar System, so far as we know, is
Pluto, a small body at a mean distance of four light hours from the
Sun (although it is currently inside the orbit of Neptune). Out
beyond the known planets, we pass through uncharted territory:
there could be comets, asteroids, planets or moons at distances of
light days or light weeks, but we know nothing of them. Eventually,
light months to a light year beyond the Sun, we pass through a huge
cloud of mostly kilometer-sized bodies in a deeply frozen state: these
are the comets. There are at least as many comets orbiting the Sun as
there are stars in the Galaxy. Typically, a comet orbits the Sun in 3 to
6 million years, as against 250 years for Pluto, twelve for Jupiter and
one for the Earth. Comets are made of ice and dust, and possibly
larger bodies, and they are composed of the specific ‘universal mix’ of
chemical elements that is found in stars, less hydrogen and helium,
which remain gaseous even at a few degrees above absolute zero.
And it is here, on the icy outer margins of the Solar System, that we
find the potential for chaos on Earth. The existence of this cloud of
comets was only established to the satisfaction of most astronomers
around 1950.
So long as the stars were seen as the only significant component of
the Galaxy, the comet cloud could be regarded as relatively secure
and harmless. Every million years or so, a star would drift through
the cloud and gently churn up the orbits of the comets, only those
whose orbits led them almost into the path of the intruder being
disturbed sufficiently to be thrown off course, possibly into
interstellar space; the overall effect of these stellar encounters is
weak enough to leave the bulk of the comet cloud firmly intact. This
quiescent picture was almost universally held until the late 1970's,
and is entirely in keeping with a view of the Earth as a body isolated
from its environment and undisturbed by extraterrestrial visitation.
In recent years however, with the discovery by radio astronomers of
cold, dark massive nebulae in the Milky Way known as molecular
clouds, it has come to be realized that the reality is different, that the
comet cloud is in fact transient and unstable, and that the Earth is
very much affected by its astronomical environment.
The patchy irregular structure of the Milky Way is obvious on any
clear night and has long been known to be due to dark clouds of gas
and dust obscuring the starlight behind them. However nobody knew
how massive these nebulae were likely to be and it is only through
the studies by radio astronomers that we have now become aware
they are in fact a major constituent of the galactic disc, and include
the most massive single bodies in the Galaxy. This fact had been
missed because the clouds are for the most part extremely cold, only
a few degrees above absolute zero; and at such low temperatures
hydrogen, the commonest element, exists largely in molecular form
which is undetectable in ordinary light. However the presence of
molecular hydrogen can now be inferred through radio emissions
from carbon monoxide which acts as a tracer for hydrogen in
concentrations of cold cosmic gas. It turns out that a typical giant
molecular cloud is about 100 light years across — 30 metres on the
Greater London scale — and that they often contain dense
concentrations of young stars and, in all probability, enormous
numbers of newly formed comets as well, circulating freely within
the nebula. The mass of a giant molecular cloud may be half a million
times that of the Sun. A few thousand of these monsters orbit the
Galaxy, confined within the flat plane of the Milky Way, and the Sun
has probably penetrated ten or twenty of them in the course of its
history, and had close encounters with many more.
The effect of such encounters is calculable: the Solar System must
have been stripped of its comet cloud not once but many times in the
course of its history. Nevertheless it is there! It follows that the cloud
must from time to time be replenished. The source of the
replenishing comets, and how they come to be emplaced in orbits a
light year from the Sun, are interesting unresolved issues at the
present time; indeed the ultimate origin of comets has been a
controversial question for hundred of years. 74 But this need not
concern us here: the important thing is that we have now realized
there is a cosmic process with the potential for terrestrial
catastrophe. For during the Sun’s bumpy passage near or through a
molecular cloud, the comet cloud is subjected to severe gravitational
buffeting. The result is that, not only are many comets flung into
interstellar space, others are thrown into orbits which take them,
several million years later, directly into the planetary system.
It has also been realized recently that over and above the effects of
molecular clouds, which are encountered irregularly, the
gravitational influence of even larger structures in the Galaxy is also
important. These larger structures, spiral arms (see plate 13) and
even the galactic disc itself, create tides. At the surface of the Earth
their strength is minute, but at the distances characteristic of the
comets they have a profound effect on cometry orbits. As the Sun
goes round the Galaxy, passing in and out of spiral arms and up and
down through the galactic plane, the strength of the galactic tide
ebbs and flows in a periodic manner. Periods of high and low tidal
stress on the comet cloud occur, leading to periods of high and low
comet flux into the planetary system.
Plate 13. A typical galaxy, showing spiral arms: Messier 83, a
large, almost face-on spiral galaxy perhaps 10 million light years
away in the constellation Centaurus. This galaxy probably
resembles our own. It contains strong, complex spiral arms with
narrow dust lanes, young hot stars and cold, probably cometbearing nebulae. An exotic radio source lies at the nucleus of this
galaxy (photograph reproduced by kind permission of the Royal
Observatory, Edinburgh).
There are therefore two main sources of disturbance of comet orbits,
one erratic and one periodic. The variable galactic tide gives periods
of high and low comet influx depending on the Sun’s position in the
Galaxy, and superimposed on this regularity, molecular cloud
passages give rise to showers of comets into the terrestrial
neighbourhood, each shower lasting for something like three or four
million years. By ordinary standards, the term ‘shower’ is a trifle
exaggerated since the flux implies only a few comets per annum in
the vicinity of the Earth’s orbit; nevertheless it is entirely appropriate
on the cosmic scale. It will turn out that the Sun’s current position on
this grand, galactic scale is very relevant to our assessment of the
celestial hazards we face at the present time.
The fact that the flux of comets varies does not of course change the
nature of comets all other things being equal, the assumption that
comets are harmless might still apply. And indeed, despite their
occasional spectacular appearance due to the release of volatile gases
and dust close to the Sun, with one or more tails that stretch across
the sky (plate 14), comets are still widely represented by scientists as
presenting no danger. Their masses are said to be so inconsequential
in the Solar System scheme of things that a collision with a comet is
‘like an insect trying to knock down a locomotive’; and in any case
‘millions of years may pass before the occurrence of a fall of any
importance. We may thus live on without worrying about this highly
infrequent danger’. 75 Such statements do not accord with history.
And as we shall soon see, they do not accord with science either.
The fallacy in the argument is that not all comets are small and
insignificant. Most comets are only a few kilometers in diameter, the
larger ones being progressively rarer. However, although very large
comets are extremely infrequent, they are so massive that they
dominate the entire comet system. If a random sample of a hundred
comets were taken from the Sun’s comet cloud, half their total mass
would be contained in the largest one or two. In considering the
effects of the fluctuating rate at which comets arrive in the planetary
system, therefore, it has to be appreciated that the influx of mass is
overwhelmingly dominated by the rarest monsters. This seems an
obvious enough point, but it is continually overlooked, as a result of
which a fundamentally erroneous view of the astronomical
environment has been widely adopted by geologists, palaeontologists
and others now attempting to interpret Earth history in the new
catastrophist mould.
Comets more than about 50 kilometres in diameter will come in from
beyond Saturn and be deflected into unstable short-period orbits at
intervals of about fifty thousand years. Many of these will eventually
be thrown out of the planetary system — to wander perhaps in
isolation through the Galaxy forever — but many will also be caught
up by Jupiter’s powerful gravity and thrown into short-period orbits
that regularly intersect the Earth’s path around the Sun, over the few
million years of a comet shower therefore, or when the Sun is deeply
immersed in a spiral arm, perhaps twenty or thirty giant comets will
join the inner planets, there to be destroyed by the heat of the Sun,
every 100,000 years or so therefore, during a high-risk period, the
Earth encounters the debris left in the inner Solar System by a
disintegrating giant comet. Most of this debris is in practice
generated for only a fraction of the time before it is eventually blown
away by the solar wind. But it is in fact during these periods when
much of the freshly formed debris still circulates that the Earth is
now known to be particularly vulnerable. It is obviously necessary
that we learn a little more about how giant comets behave.
Plate 14. The Great Comet of 1843, as drawn by Piazzi Smyth in
March 1843, at the Cape of Good Hope (the comet was not
visible from Europe). It appears that such comets, moving along
the zodiac in short-period orbits, were a regular part of the night
sky in early historical times (reproduced by kind permission of
the Don Africana Library, Durban, South Africa).
An important facet of comet evolution is their tendency to split into
fragments, each fragment more or less temporarily leading an
independent life as a comet, with head and tail. The splitting of a
comet (‘a flaming torch of exceptional size’ according to Diodorus
Siculus) was allegedly reported in 372 BC by the Greek Ephorus,
each ‘star’ following a separate route over the sky. It has been
suggested that Ephorus may have invented the splitting to give
credence to a theory that comets were formed from the union of
stars, but it now seems much more likely that the ‘union of stars’
theory was derived from ancient observations of comets splitting.
Certainly Democritus reported that comet sometimes disintegrated
into stars. Similar observations are found, scattered through the
ages, in the records of the Chinese and Western astronomers, comets
sometimes dividing into four or five. Thus there is no question
nowadays that comets have a not infrequent tendency to split.
One of the most interesting comets observed to break up since the
keeping of reliable records was that named after an Austrian army
officer Biela in 1826 (although Pons, a janitor at the Marseilles
Observatory, had seen it in 1805). The comet had a period of about
seven years with an orbit which came within 20,000 miles of the
Earth’s, the Earth being nearest to the Biela orbit on 27 November
each year. During a subsequent return, on 13 January 1846, the
comet split into two under the eyes of the observers, a faint
companion detaching itself and rapidly growing in brightness. The
two comets were seen again on their return in September 1852, being
then 1,500,000 miles apart. But in 1865, when the comet pair were
due back, nothing was found: comet and companion had vanished.
And then on 27 November 1872, the Earth ran into a swarm of
meteors: ‘they fell in large flakes, the streaks of fire coming down
vertically in shower after shower with blinding balls of light and
noiseless explosions looking like cascades of fireworks’. It is
estimated that 160,000 shooting stars came in over the six hour
duration of the shower (plate 15). The Andromedid shower, as it is
called, was seen again on 27. November 1885, and can be seen
annually, much reduced, to the present day, the meteors having
spread around the entire cometary orbit. Biela’s comet, however, has
never been seen again. 76
Splitting is readily understood in the case of the giant parent of the
Kreutz grop, so-called, which skims the surface of the Sun: comet
material is very weak and the tidal forces exerted by the Sun’s
gravitational field are enough to generate a cascade of
fragmentations. However this externally forced splitting is only a
minor factor. Most splitting have occurred more or less anywhere
along the orbital track of a comet, and it is clear that some other
energy source must be involved. The nature of the source is
unknown; it might for example represent stored chemical energy or
the impact of a boulder in space. Thermal stresses, too, are adequate
to crack cometary ice, creating surface rubble and systems of cracks
which may be up to a hundred metres deep. Any fragmentation then
may be spontaneous, or it may be triggered by an explosive
encounter with a very small piece of Solar System debris.
Does it follow that all comets just evaporate away, leaving nothing
more than dust orbiting the Sun? It would seem not. There are now
several examples of comets that have an almost asteroidal
appearance in the telescope, as if they had degassed and been left
with a pumice-like surface. A number of asteroids moreover are in
comet-like orbits, so the impression has grown that a comet can
evolve not just by releasing gas and dust and running through a
hierarchy of fragmentations, but that it can also degenerate into one
or more inactive solid bodies. This has been confirmed by the recent
discovery that most Earth-crossing asteroids are shedding meteors
along their orbital paths.
Plate 15. Appearance of the sky during the night of 27 November
1872 due to the meteor shower resulting from the fragmentation
of Comet Biela. Note the conspicuous bolide (from ‘Les Etoiles
Filantes’ by Amedee Guillemin, Libraire Hachette, Paris, 1889).
Halley’s Comet entered the domain of the inner planets in 1986, and
was intercepted at around 70 kilometres a second by a small armada
of spacecraft. Most of the outgassing observed from this comet (plate
9) during the flyby of the Giottto and Vega space probes came from
only a few jets on the expose surface, the rest of the nucleus having a
black, solid appearance. It is possible that the comet was once active
over the whole of its surface, say 20,000 or more years ago, but that
the escaping gas has been gradually choked off by large dust particles
falling back on to the nucleus. In years to come, the comet will be to
all intents and purposes an asteroid. But it may still have an icy core.
Not all comets appear to be changing into asteroids however, and it
is likely that smaller or less dusty ones just evaporate away.
Larger comets, like several planetary satellites of similar dimensions,
could possibly have rocky interiors. Whether or not this is so, we may
expect that a giant comet, once it is captured into a short-period
orbit, will over several thousand years generate a vast meteor stream
along its orbital track until at an advanced stage of its evolution,
perhaps ten to twenty thousand years into its lifetime, it has turned
into an asteroidal body of still substantial size. From then on, there is
a less conspicuous but extended period of decline, perhaps two or
three times as long, during which the fragile core of the giant comet
is whittled away, in part by encounters with small pieces of debris
drifting around the Solar System. The result of this destruction is to
create a huge expanding swarm of asteroidal flotsam and jetsam
concentrated around the core and intermittently replenished from it.
The passage of the Earth through one such swarm was confirmed
with the aid of lunar seismometers in late June 1975. This
concentration of material was encountered as the Earth passed
through a meteor stream (figure 6). As many one-ton boulders struck
the Moon over five days as had hit it over the previous five years. A
duration of passage of five days corresponds to a swarm of diameter
at least 15 million kilometers. As the meteor stream in question, the
Beta Taurids, strikes the day-time hemisphere, nothing was seen
from the Earth, but a nighttime encounter of the Earth with this
material could have given rise to a spectacular fireball shower of
several days’ duration. If, however, the Earth had encountered this
material at an early stage of the swarm’s creation, when its diameter
was say 1 percent of its 1975 value, then although the encounter
would have endured for only a few hours, it would have yielded a
fireball impact rate a million times higher. This is the likely cause of
the rare day-time fireball swarms recorded by the Chinese
chroniclers. In addition, there would be a greatly enhanced
probability of being struck by much larger bodies. In the aftermath of
a major splitting or a major fragmentation, a giant comet or its
asteroidal remnant is likely to be at its most dangerous. For a period
of hundreds of years, a huge concentrated population of boulders
and larger bodies will be present in the swarm with a greatly
enhanced risk of planetary encounters. With the passage of time of
course, the individual bodies will further disintegrate and the dust
will spread away from its parent orbit so as to form a fat elliptical
tube penetrated by the inner planetry system; later still, a few
thousand years after the fragmentation, the dust will have spread
into a flattish disc, the zodiacal cloud, occupying the whole domain of
the terrestrial planets.
Figure 6. Diagram showing the average number of meteoroids
striking the Moon on each day of the year over the period 1972-
76, as recorded with seismometers left by the Apollo astronauts.
The conspicuous peak at the end of June represents the flux over
a few days in 1975 due to a swarm of more massive meteoroids
coinciding with the Beta Taurid stream.
The astronomical framework for a theory of terrestrial catastrophism
is now essentially complete, and it provides a perspective that is very
different from the one that has dominated scientific thinking over
the last three hundred years. It is also very different from the picture
currently adopted by many modern catastrophists in the Earth
sciences who, recently converted by hard geological evidence of
astronomical inputs in particular strata, still ignore the hard
astronomical evidence obtained by looking upwards.
This ignoring of basic data has two obvious outcomes. One is that
discussion of catastrophism in geological circles is even yet largely
conditioned by a view of Earth history which is essentially
uniformitarian, with single, giant impacts occasionally interrupting a
basically internal evolution. Such matters as the possibility of
galactic cycles in the terrestrial record, or the climatic effects of
stratospheric dusting from the debris of giant comets, are excluded
by fiat. Another outcome is that catastrophe from the sky is assumed
to be something that happens only on the vast timescales one meets
in the geological record; the concept of astronomical catastrophe on
historical timescales is effectively written off at the outset. We can
illustrate these points by considering the Sun’s orbit in the Galaxy
and its encounters with massive interstellar nebulae. These latter, as
we have seen, are distributed in a flat plane more or less coincident
with the Milky Way.
In relation to the disc of the Galaxy, and in common with the other
stars in the disc, the Sun has two components of motion; one an upand-down oscillation carrying it through the plane of the disc every
30 million years or so, the other an in-and-out motion with respect
to the galactic centre. This latter ‘galactic year’ is about 250 million
years long. Now stars and molecular clouds are concentrated towards
both the plane of the disc, towards the inner regions of the Galaxy,
and in spiral arms. The Solar System therefore encounters nebulae
preferentially in these regions. The cumulative effect of these
encounters is to impose longterm variations on the comet flux, with
timescales of around 30 and 250 million years. The longer timescale
is not strictly periodic since both the solar orbit and the presence of
molecular clouds in the Galaxy may well be irregular; but the shorter
30 million year timescale, due to the galactic tide, should be more
nearly a true period.
Consider now the situation when the Sun is inside a spiral arm.
When the Sun is in the centre of the arm, and so also in the plane of
the Galaxy, the tidal stress acting on the comet cloud is at a
maximum, and the comet influx is at its greatest. The effect of the
up-and-down motion in the Galaxy during any spiral ai m passage is
to impose a shallow porpoise-like motion on the Sun which causes it
to coast along just above and just below the arm between successive
penetrations. Whilst lingering at these levels the tidal stress again
reaches a maximum, and so at the points of entry and departure
from the spiral arm the galactic tide is reduced, causing the comet
flux to decline. The effect therefore is to interrupt the basic 30-
million-year cycle, giving rise to what is essentially a 15-million-year
one. The effect may therefore be to force a 15-million periodicity on
the Earth, with weak and strong cycles alternating. In a poorly
determined terrestrial record, this might be misinterpreted as a 30-
million-year one. Further, it is likely the comet cloud is replenished
when the Sun passes through the spiral arms of the Galaxy. Comet
activity on the Earth may be appreciable only during such passages,
and if so, the terrestrial record will show a 15-million year cycle, but
one which is intermittent, switching on for 50 to 100 million years
while the Sun is immersed in a spiral arm, and declining for a similar
period outside it. If this galactic theory is correct, Earth history may
therefore have an episodic character, with 15- or 30-million-year
cycles switching on and off. The evidence suggests that this is exactly
what is observed (chapter 14). It should be said, however, that the
galactic environment is still not well explored. Several galactic
periodicities could be imposed on Earth processes, and their relative
strengths are still a matter for the empirical discovery of geologists
and not the revealed wisdom of astronomers.
A question of immediate and even human importance is where we
stand in relation to these periodic surges of comet activity. The Sun
is near the plane of the Galaxy and has also just emerged from the
edge of a spiral arm of the Galaxy, known as the Orion arm. Further,
it is at present moving through an environment which seems to be
that of an old disintegrating molecular cloud. There are numerous
dense nebulae in the solar neighbourhood, most of which seem to be
organized into a ring of gas and young blue stars. The blue stars form
a belt over the night sky, noted by Ptolemy as long ago as AD 150,
and known as Gould’s Belt. The ring is inclined at about 20 degrees
to the plane of the Galaxy; the Orion nebula to the south, and stars in
the constellation Scorpio in the north, are part of this complex of
material. This massive ring of stars and gas is expanding rapidly,
following some energetic event of 30 million years ago, and only
about 6 to 9 million years ago the Sun passed through the rim,
moving at some 20 to 25 kilometres per second. Because of the mass
of material in this ring, the comet cloud must have been disturbed
during this close encounter. Once disturbed, the comets at the outer
edge of the comet cloud fall into the inner planetary system in about
3 to 5 million years. We expect, therefore, that the Earth is in the
declining tail of a comet shower which peaked 3 to 5 million years
ago. Thus the conditions which would yield an exceptional flux of
comets on to the Earth — positioning near the galactic plane,
proximity to a spiral arm, and recent passage through a system of
molecular clouds — are all simultaneously met by the Solar System at
the present time.
As noted, very few comets present any danger to the Earth but the
occasional giant comet that is trapped in an Earth-crossing orbit of
short period rapidly develops in such a manner as to intermittently
generate a substantial swarm of bodies which are commonly
asteroidal. The giant comets recur at intervals of about 100,000
years during a shower whilst the terrestrial encounters with the
asteroidal swarms, which may continue for a century or two, recur at
intervals of about a millennium.
To summarize: we expect both galactic periodicities and irregular
cometary surges to be imprinted on the terrestrial record. Of the
periodicities, one of around 30 million years (or 15 million years in
particular circumstances) is likely to be the strongest. Because of the
Sun’s position near to both the Orion spiral arm and the plane of the
Galaxy, we expect that the Earth is even now in a period of enhanced
risk. The risk is further enhanced by the fact that the Sun has
recently passed through a complex of debris associated with Gould’s
Belt.
We should look therefore for a currently disturbed comet cloud and a
currently disturbed Earth. Such evidence exists (table 5). We expect
the disturbances of the Earth and its biosphere to be profound: as we
shall see, the extinction rate, the incidence of mountain building, the
rise and fall of oceans, reversals of the Earth’s magnetic field, are all
expected to be under the control of the Galaxy. During peaks of
activity, with a large disintegrating comet in the inner planetary
system, we expect climatic recessions at random intervals of around
a thousand years reaching peak intensity every hundred thousand
years or so. This is an average picture however and more has to be
known of recent and forthcoming giant comets to calculate the
Earth’s immediate past and future with any precision. Nevertheless,
it follows that the Earth’s environment must be currently hazardous
because of the intermittent presence of great comets.There is strong
evidence, indeed, that the last giant comet entered an Earth-crossing
orbit only a few tens of thousands of years ago, so its asterodial
debris (including its resultant zodiacal cloud) are in orbit even now.
The comet should therefore indeed have made its mark on history as
well as on recent geology. Furthermore, a cometary body at least 250
kilometres in diameter, Chiron by name, has already been sighted in
a chaotic orbit out beyond Saturn and there is good reason to believe
it may be entering an Earth-crossing orbit within the next 100,000
years: Chiron may then be responsible for the next major ice age.
Chiron is obviously not of great urgency but the same cannot be said
of the asteroidal remnants of the most recent giant comet.
Unfortunately most of these Earth-crossing bodies are completely
uncharted and we have no means of knowing which of these will
produce the next significant encounter with the Earth.
The Pleistocene ice epoch began about 2.5 million years ago,
consistent with a sudden influx of comets from the disturbed cloud,
although mountain glaciers were beginning to extend even before
then. This epoch, like others which have occurred in Earth history, is
broken up into a series of very erratic ice ages, each of duration
typically 10,000 to 100,000 years. Again, these timescales are about
those associated with intermittent arrival and disintegration of the
greatest comets, although no great precision can be put on the
figures. The last ice age ended just over 10,000 years ago. We are
therefore, at the moment, living in a warm interglacial period.
Interspersing such warm periods, however, are short cooling
episodes, very sudden in onset, and lasting typically ten to a hundred
years. During these episodes the Earth’s climate plunges into glacial
severity. Such cooling episodes may be of great human consequence
and will be discussed presently; for the moment we note only that for
the first time there is a scientific basis for a catastrophist
interpretation of human history; and we begin to discern that the
threat form the sky may have a wintry aspect. Let us take a closer
look at the material orbiting in the space around us.