
Epilogue
It is the fate of all species to become extinct and most manlike
species have already done so. Over and above extinction, large
population fluctuations take place in nature, sometimes within a few
years. The controlling factor is often climate, and Earth’s climate, in
turn, can be greatly affected by its astronomical surroundings.
The two and a half centuries which lay between the Gervase
chronicle of 1178 and the onset of the Black Death in Europe in 1348
saw ‘an acute crisis developing in human affairs’. One
chronicler 136 at least reports of the most immediate cause of the
plague in 1345 that ‘between Cathay and Persia there rained a vast
plain of fire; falling in flakes like snow and burning up mountains
and plains and other lands, with men and women; and then arose
vast masses of smoke; and whosoever beheld this died within the
space of half a day ...’ there seems little doubt also that a worldwide
cooling of the Earth played a fundamental part in the process. The
Arctic polar cap extended, changing the cyclonic pattern and leading
to a series of disastrous harvests. These in turn led to widespread
famine, death and social disruption. In England and Scotland there
is a pattern of abandoned villages and farms, soaring wheat prices
and falling populations. In Eastern Europe there was a series of
winters of unparalleled severity and depth of snow. The chronicles of
monasteries in Poland and Russia tell of cannibalism, common
graves over-filled with corpses, and migrations to the west. Even
before the Black Death came, then, a human catastrophe of great
proportions was under way in late medieval times. Indeed the cold
snap lasted well beyond the period of the bubonic plague. A number
of such fluctuations are to be found in the historical record, and
there is good evidence that these climatic stresses are connected not
only with famine but also with times of great social unrest, wars,
revolution and mass migrations.
In spite of their traumatic effects, these global coolings probably
amounted to no more that about a degree in average summer
temperatures as compared with today: even relatively minor climatic
effects have had a profound influence on human history. A major
cosmic winter, on the other hand, is likely to produce a rapid global
climatic cooling amounting to several degrees. With the modern
dependence on ‘green revolution’ crops, finely tuned to give a high
yield under a narrow range of climatic conditions, the onset of such a
‘winter’ would cause the population of the world to crash in the
course of a decade, or even a single year. Such events are completely
outside normal experience and their existence is not generally
recognized, even though they represent a hazard vastly more horrific
than any of the more familiar catastrophes such as earthquake,
famine or flood. As we have seen, there is a fair chance that our
planet will be caught in the icy grip of such a cosmic winter at
intervals of a thousand years or so. Lesser catastrophes, little ice ages
in effect, will arise on timescales of a few centuries. At an individual
level, the risk amounts to a few percent within a lifetime. More to the
point, though, civilization is in the presence of a hitherto
unrecognized cosmic phenomenon which could plunge it without
warning into a Dark Age.
What can be done? Unfortunately the extent and epoch of the next
cosmic winter depend for the moment on a number of
imponderables which lie outside the scope of existing knowledge: it
is not now possible to make an accurate assessment of what the
future has in store. This is clearly not a satisfactory state of affairs,
nor can we expect that Nature will hold back on account of our
ignorance or lack of preparedness. However, in view of seriousness
of cosmic winters for human survival, and noting the vast
expenditures to the tune of many billions of dollars on a whole
variety of preparations for all manner of lesser hazards and
calamities, both man-made and natural, disease and nuclear war not
excluded, one must surely note also that not a single cent (or penny!)
of taxpayers’ money is currently devoted to their study.
The first step must therefore be one of exploration. An asteroid in a
Taurid orbit, carrying 100,000 megatons of impact energy, coming
out of the night sky, would be visible in binoculars for about six
hours before impact. By the same time if it was a naked-eye object it
would be at most half an hour from collision. In its final plunge it
would be seen as a brilliant moving object for perhaps 30 seconds.
One needs more time than this to prepare for the winter. A thorough
exploration of the Earth’s surroundings, and the discovery and
tracking of probably tens of thousands of bodies, is therefore a first
requirement. This is technically feasible.
Complementing such an observational programme, a fresh
exploration of the past, aimed with the new astronomical
understandings, is also necessary; not just for its own sake but also
to arrive at a better understanding of the risks. For example one
would like to find physical evidence to confirm or deny an
astronomical catastrophe in the Near East in the second millennium
BC. A search for Tunguska-like material in the Mediterranean sea
bed is one possibility. Evidence for high-temperature effects is
another: the brief thermal pulse from a big fireball would glaze rocks
and create shadow effects, which fire created by straw-burning
invaders would not. A thin layer of soot, arising from extensive
conflagration on open ground, should be present in the strata from
the period. The effects of blast might be distinguished from those of
earthquake by the disposition of fallen debris; and so on. To go from
mere statistical projection to detailed forecasting, then, a generation
of exploration, both of the Earth’s environment and of our history
and prehistory, will be necessary. As we have remarked, such studies
cannot be seen only as an academic game: there is nothing academic
about a 1,000-megaton impact, and the modern prospects for
nuclear error, not to mention nuclear meltdown, exacerbate the
issue.
And if the sirens should sound, what then? It may be marginally
within the capacity of present-day technology to divert a small
asteroid, given enough warning, though not a swarm of them: it
would take a heavy launcher and a hydrogen bomb. But at least,
unlike our forebears, we have a chance to act; we need no longer be
helpless in the hands of the gods. The main problem at the moment
is to be aware that there is a problem.
Three thousand years ago, in accordance with age-old practice, the
kings of Babylon were still employing astronomer-priests to give
warnings of cosmic visitations. A thousand years ago, the emperors
of China were still relying on similar skills, while in Europe the Pope
saw messages in the sky and urged Holy War. But this latter was an
aberration; for the last two and a half thousand years have seen the
decline and fall of the sky gods, and the growing presumption that
the cosmos is stable and regular. The shift of paradigm has been
unconscious, convenient, insidious and thorough. Probably, the
rediscovery of a lost tradition of celestial catastrophe could not have
been made through analysis of ancient texts alone; a key had to be
provided, and it has been, by the paraphernalia of modern science. It
is a salutary lesson both on the capacity of human reasoning to get it
wrong for long periods of time, and on the essential unity of
knowledge.
It would be naive to think, however, that one merely has to point to
deep-seated cracks in the structure of modern knowledge, to have
scholars setting to and constructing a better framework within which
mankind might plan his future. There is considerable intellectual
capital invested in the status quo, enough to ensure that those with
an interest in preserving it, the ‘enlightened’ and the ‘established’,
will continue to present the cosmos to us in a suitably non-violent
form. The history of ideas reveals that some will even go further and
act as a kind of thought police, whipping potential deviants into line.
For them, temporal power takes precedence over the fate of the
species.
There is a need for this book.