Prologue
It is 7.17 am. Eastern Standard Time, on the thirtieth of June 1994.
Suddenly the power fails.
The basement centre of the Defense Communication Operations Unit
adjoining the White House is plunged into darkness, and only the
distant rumble of early morning traffic reminds the duty officer that
another day has already begun. There have been power failures
before, however, and there is no hint of impending crisis.
Almost immediately, an automatic switch brings in the emergency
supply. But now the duty officer observes that something is wrong.
Telephone links to the outside world have gone. These include the
open links, via commercial cables, to NORAD’s bunker a thousand
feet under Cheyenne Peak in Colorado, and to the Offutt command
post near Omaha.
Within seconds it is ascertained that neither the President nor
VicePresident, both of whom are out of town, can be contacted: radio
communications are blacked out, on all frequencies. Further,
because of the telephone failure, none of the Presidential stand-ins
scattered around town and country can be expected to call in to give
their exact locations, as they would normally if there were a
recognized national emergency. However, the Secretary of Defense,
third in the chain of command, is at breakfast somewhere in the
White House.
It has taken 45 seconds to confirm the general breakdown of
communications; it takes another 45 seconds to locate the Secretary
of Defense and inform him of the problem; and it is another 90
seconds before the Secretary finds himself in the cramped underground Situation Room along with his advisors. He is aware that the
travel time of a missile from a hostile submarine off the Atlantic
coast to Washington is just over fifteen minutes; three of these
minutes have gone.
Emergency procedures for transferring authority are now in hand
and the Secretary of Defense becomes in effect the new President.
The ‘gold codes’, which would enable him to initiate a nuclear
response, are placed before him. The black STOP books with their
theoretical scenarios are produced. The ‘Mystic’ and ‘Nationwide’
communication systems are successfully activated utilizing deeply
buried, protected cables. He now has control of the National
Command Authority, the channel of communication for execution of
a nuclear strike; and another two minutes have gone.
The underground cables to Cheyenne, Offutt and other SAC bases are
now open with secure links to the radar lines covering northern
approaches. None of them — Dew Line, the 55th Parallel or Pine
Tree — is functioning properly, however; their screens are strongly
upset with many spurious signals: there seem to be huge scattering
modes in the ionosphere. Satellite communication with military
forces abroad is impaired. No information is coming from the big
synchronous DSP satellites over South America, the central Pacific or
the Indian Ocean; nothing is arriving from the relay stations near
Aurora in Colorado or Pine Gap in Australia. And the ‘hot line’ is
dead. On the other hand in the minutes before the confusion they
had reported no anomalous infrared emissions and hence no
evidence of heat from the exhausts of rising missiles. At the moment
all that can be said is that there is a very unusual atmospheric
disturbance, that telephone lines are dead and that there are
widespread power failures. The disturbed atmosphere might just be
some strange effect due to sunspots or the like, but the telephone and
power failures are ominous. On such a scale, the only plausible
explanation is an electromagnetic pulse caused by nuclear fireballs.
Eight minutes into the emergency — if it is an emergency — the
Secretary issues a number of precautionary orders. His deputy is
ordered upstairs to await the arrival of a helicopter from Quantico
Marine Corps base about 30 miles away. This will transport the
deputy to the waiting ‘Nightwatch’, a Boeing 747 which functions as
an airborne command post. Another helicopter is dispatched to
retrieve the President. A ‘flash alert’ is sent to Hawaii, to get a second
command post aloft, but the message goes unacknowledged. SAC
missile silos and bomber bases are put on full alert.
Nine minutes on, information begins to flood in from sensors and
antennae in orbit, at sea and scattered round the Earth. Much of it is
reassuring: there are no patterns of activity on land, sea or air
consistent with hostile intentions, no evacuations of barracks or the
like are in progress. But now something deeply disturbing is coming
in from one of the DSP satellites. A television screen shows a brilliant
patch over south-east Nevada, bright enough to saturate the lead
sulphide cells in the satellite. Intense heat is radiating from an area
of about ten thousand square kilometers. Distant ground sensors are
reporting large tremors emanating from the same
area — unnecessarily, as the Situation Room has begun to sway and
vibrate, and loud rumblings are coming up from deep under the
ground. Then, from Offutt, comes devastating news. Air Force pilots
are reporting a huge explosion in the desert area close to Boulder
City. The city itself has gone, reduced to rubble. Las Vegas and other
towns within 100 miles are enveloped in huge firestorms. The
Hoover Dam has disintegrated. A column of dust and rubble has
been sucked up to great altitude and a mushroom cloud is spreading
outwards. Huge amounts of smoke are blanketing the state of
Arizona and spreading into New Mexico itself. The Secretary and his
advisors can see it all on their television screens.
The Secretary now has a maximum of five minutes in which to
discuss and evaluate the information, make any decisions and
implement them. He is informed that the damage corresponds to
explosions amounting to at least twenty megatons, and must have
been caused by more than one bomb. The possibility of accidental
detonations is quickly ruled out, because of its technical
improbability and the magnitude of the explosion. Further, he is told
that both ground and air bursts must have been involved to disrupt
both cable and ionospheric communications. The conclusion seems
unavoidable that for some reason the Soviets have targeted bombs
on to American territory giving somehow circumvented military
radars. Perhaps armed satellites with low radar cross-section have
suddenly been diverted downwards; or perhaps submarine-launched
cruise missiles have been fired; or perhaps bombs had already been
smuggled into the area. But why? The desert is a bizarre choice of
target, Boulder, Las Vegas and the Hoover Dam of low strategic
value. No sense can be made of the attack. Perhaps, it is suggested,
they were chosen because they have little value. The attack may be a
prelude to some major military adventure and may be a warning,
‘keep out’ notice pitched at a level low enough that the risks of
nuclear response are not justified and yet high enough to
demonstrate deadly earnest. Or, the impacts may be intended to
disrupt radar and communications for reasons which can only be
guessed at.
Whatever the merits of such speculations, the Secretary cannot
responsibly rule out the possibility that further bombs may follow,
completely jamming command and control over nuclear weapons, or
even that Washington is an imminent target whose destruction
might for example be awaiting only the positioning of armed
satellites, already in orbit, over the city, or the arrival of cruise
missiles. Twelve minutes into the emergency, the Secretary’s deputy
is still on the White House lawn waiting for a helicopter, there is no
communication with the President and the only information still
coming in confirms that towns over several thousand square miles
have been destroyed in nuclear blasts. He has no time left and must
come to an immediate decision.
He could initiate the dreaded ‘Major Attack Option’. This is quickly
ruled out because it is beyond reason, leading only to mutual
annihilation. He could choose to do nothing. But it is pointed out
that in the present situation paralysis could also lead to holocaust.
Whether the National Command Authority is ‘decapitated’ in the
next few minutes depends on whether further missiles are about to
land. If they are, then all control over the counter-strike force may be
lost and, with bombs falling on the USA, a full-scale attack on the
Soviet Union will, following standing instructions, be unleashed by
individual submarine commanders, and by the one star generals
aboard their Cover All airborne command posts. It is therefore vital
to forestall any further nuclear attacks by calling the bluff, that is by
retaliating at a similar level. All the options are dangerous. The least
dangerous is an immediate ‘controlled response’.
The discussions are interrupted by confused reports of a storm of
missiles, a cataract of fire pouring in over the states of the western
seaboard and Canada. But the reports go unconfirmed; again,
communications are failing over the whole of the United States.
It is 7:30 am. Eastern Standard Time, on the thirtieth of June, in the
revamped over-the-horizon radar base near Gomel in Byelo-Russia
officers are horrified to see, through the confusion of the still
disturbed ionosphere, a dozen missile tracks appealing on their
screens. Peacekeepers are rising over the plains of Kansas ...
Even as they look, however, another unheralded missile is
encountering the atmosphere high over the Bernese Oberland.
Coming in at sixty thousand miles an hour, a hundred kilometers
above Interlaken, the missile is gathering around itself a narrow skin
of compressed air whose temperature surges up to about half a
million degrees. Waves ripple within the hot air-turned-plasma;
atoms, scattering off the waves, reach huge speeds, collide violently,
and are stripped to their nuclei; electrons, torn from the atoms.
Accelerate violently and radiate fiercely at all wavelengths. For the
most part this fierce emission is invisible, hard ultraviolet light or
soft X-rays, and the atmosphere absorbs these at altitude, 50 to 90
kilometers up. Only a tiny fraction of the radiation reaches the
ground as visible light. Even so, Europe is lit up as if with a
flashbulb: survivors from Ireland to Austria and from Denmark to
Italy later describe’ a bluish white light, too bright for the naked eye’,
or ‘a fire brighter than the Sun’, or ‘a thunderbolt ... blinding in its
intensity’. Approaching from the south east, the missile passes on a
long, shallow trajectory, throwing moving shadows over the
Jungfrau, Berne and Basle. It crosses the sky in a few seconds,
leaving a wake of hot, luminous debris and air surrounded by a
rapidly expanding red trail. Ten seconds after its first encounter with
the atmosphere, the missile has penetrated the ionosphere, passed
though the stratosphere and is moving rapidly into the lower
atmosphere.
Here at an altitude between 10 and 15 kilometers, the missile hits
scientifically denser air and suddenly disintegrates. It never reaches
the ground therefore and instead unloads its stored-up power, 200
megatons of impact energy, into the air over Louvain, a mediumsized town in central Belgium. The missile vaporizes in a third of a
second. It is now, momentarily, an incandescent cylinder a few
kilometers long and a few hundred meters across. The temperature
within the cylinder is over 100, 000° C. The pressure for an instant
reaches some tens of thousands of tons per square inch; the missile
blows up into a ball of fire radiating X-rays of huge intensity. These
are absorbed within a few meters by the surrounding air, but, in
doing so, the envelope of atmospheric gas acquires their energy.
Simultaneously, hot, compressed material is thrusting rapidly
outwards from the point of disintegration and snowploughing the air
ahead of it. A blast wave develops; the fireball expands. From the
first trace of incandescent tail high over Interlaken, to the beginnings
of the fireball over Louvain, less than eleven seconds have elapsed.
When the fireball has reached about four miles in diameter the shock
wave breaks away and races ahead of it. The corresponding blast
brings a wind speed of over a thousand miles an hour. Survival at
this distance is impossible; Louvain, directly under the fireball,
disappears in less than a second. The fireball meanwhile inflates and
soars rapidly upwards for several kilometers until, in the
stratosphere; it flattens out and takes the classical mushroom shape.
The cloud is seen from Copenhagen to Florence, from Edinburgh to
Budapest. And over the whole of Europe, the ground shakes and
buildings sway dangerously. Trains are derailed in southern England
and beneath the Channel. The mushroom cloud is quickly broken up
by jet streams at about 60 kilometers altitude and is subsequently
dispersed around the globe.
Within 25 kilometers of Louvain, all buildings are reduced to rubble.
A few girder bridges survive due to accidental cancellation of
pressure waves from above and below. The shock wave reaches
Brussels to the west and Liege to the east. The buildings within these
cities collapse, domino-like, as the wave sweeps through; and all
traces of roads are immediately erased by rubble. Beyond 25
kilometers, some structures survive, although few houses remain
intact. Throughout Antwerp, for example, about 50 kilometers from
ground zero, roofs are stripped bare of tiles and window frames and
doors are blown in. Beyond this the damage becomes lighter: about
100 kilometers to the north the blast, sweeping through Eindhoven,
blows tiles off roofs and shatters windows.
People out of doors and 25 kilometers from Louvain are hurled about
10 meters and are usually killed. Flying glass, though, is the greatest
hazard. Shopping precincts and office complexes within 50
kilometers find themselves swept without warning by lethal blizzards
of flying glass. Indeed, shards of glass account for most of the loss of
life in these areas. Even 100 kilometers from the epicenter of the
explosion, the blast is still strong enough to flatten forests.
Nuclear reactors within reach of the ground tremors and air waves
are damaged, their coolant pipes snapped and containment vessels
cracked. Some begin the process of meltdown. Already, swathes of
radioactive debris are pouring into the atmosphere, mingling with
the dense chemical smog, drifting into Germany, and destined for
Poland and Scandinavia.
Immense destruction is caused by fire as well as blast. Serious flash
burns from the thermal pulse of the fireball are sustained over an
area of several thousands square kilometers, and virtually all
exposed individuals within about 50 kilometers of ground zero
receive third degree burns (charred skin) requiring labour-intensive
hospital treatment, but in the hours and days following the impact it
is impossible for medical services from outside to reach, let alone
cope with, the seriously burned, and many of the injured die
untreated from shock within twelve hours.
The intense heat from the rising fireball sets off fires at a range of 70
kilometres or more. Fanned by the updraft of air sucked in behind
the rising ball, these merge into a mass fire, a single all-consuming
conflagration. Such fire services as have survived are immobilized in
a sea of debris, deprived of water and overwhelmed by the extent of
the raging fire. The Sun eventually sets, but Europe is already dark,
only the light from raging fires penetrates the smoke.
Sixteen hours after the event the Sun rises again, but it shines down
only on a dense, choking smog created by blazing cities and
petrochemical complexes. Aerial survey is impossible. Within a circle
of radius 50 kilometres, the dead greatly outnumber the living. Even
without the mass fire which is still blazing, penetration of the area is
impossible as roads are strewn by debris and wrecked vehicles. It will
be several days before the fires burn themselves out and the smog
disperses enough to reveal the flattened cities and towns, villages
and farms. Belgium, it will turn out, has been obliterated. And
several weeks would need to pass before French, German and Dutch
forces have the capacity to clear the roads, shelter the living and bury
the dead.
Belgium, however, will wait in vain ...
For the Earth has encountered a cosmic swarm. Twelve hours late,
the death-dealing fusillade is peppering the other side of the globe.
Indeed, the bombardment continues for nearly a night and day, the
planet rotating all the while, first presenting one face, then the other,
until eventually it emerges on the far side of the swarm. Compared
with the fireball over Hiroshima at the end of the Second World War,
that over Boulder was a thousand times greater whilst that over
Louvain was ten times bigger again, but they are just two of the
several hundred pieces of grape-shot that meet the Earth, and they
are trivial compared larger pieces of ordnance in train. These rarer
missiles are each capable of unloading as much energy as would be
unleashed in a major nuclear war, and in their case the atmosphere
provides relatively little protection. Thus unlike their smaller
counterparts, these larger bodies get through to the surface of the
Earth, an ocean impact generating a tsunami, a land impact
generating a small crater. There is another difference: each huge
fireball is now too energetic to be properly contained by the
atmosphere. As before, it ascends, laden with dust, but now it breaks
though generating a vacuum in its wake which is filled by a cast
stream of air. Thus, on the ground, once the initial blast has swept
past, there is a counter flowing hurricane, itself sweeping up dust
thrown up by the impact, and blowing it upwards after the rapidly
receding fireball. Within minutes the fireball has reached an altitude
of several hundred kilometers, in the high stratosphere. Here it
stabilizes, and the dust begins to spill outwards over the top of the
atmosphere.
Closer to the ground, the intense heat of impact from one large
fireball has generated hundreds of fires over an area about the size of
France. Essentially everything combustible along the line of sight of
the rising fireball has caught fire. Loss of life over this area, already
massive from the prompt effects of blast and heat, becomes almost
complete when these fires merge into a single, all-consuming
conflagration. About fifty million tons of smoke pour upwards, in
dense plumes rising to kilometers into the atmosphere.
Within a few days, the wildfires are almost global in extent. Tens of
millions of tons of fine dust lofted into the stratosphere, have spread
over the northern hemisphere and are beginning to cross into the
southern one. At ground level, sunlight is blocked from reaching the
ground, and all activity takes place in a black, choking smog. There is
no question of mounting any rescue operation to save the devastated
areas: the damage is so widespread that communications around the
globe have now effectively ceased to exist; individual regions are
virtually isolated; devastated populations are thrown back on their
own resources; dozens of cities are reduced to smouldering rubble;
river pollution is rife; and forests throughout the world are ablaze.
Life as we know it is drawing to a close.
The cosmic encounter is over. Our planet has finally emerged from
the swarm. Both continue, of course, along their predestined paths,
the swarm merely a few missiles less, the Earth now charred and
encased in a lingering veil of dust and smoke. With the destruction of
cities and urban areas, the infrastructure of civilization has already
gone; with the loss of sunlight, continental land temperatures have
already plummeted to those of a Siberian winter; thick ice covers
rivers and lakes; storms of unprecedented intensity rage along the
continental margins, with animal and plant life devastated, farming
and agriculture have already collapsed. Soon, the disrupted weather
patterns will cause the continental land masses to be blanketed in a
thick covering of snow.
After several months, the Sun begins to be seen trough a hazy sky.
When, eventually, the dust clears, the land masses of the northern
hemisphere are covered in a snowfield which, reflecting sunlight
back into space, has become permanent. The snowfield is added to
each year, centimeters at a time. A thousand years on, North America
and Europe are covered in ice sheets half a mile thick and the ocean
level has dropped by about fifty meters. The Earth is locked into a
new ice age. Mankind has survived, but human population has
crashed and society has dissolved into hungry marauding bands. A
new ecological balance is being worked out on the blasted landscape:
indeed the struggle for survival has only just begun ...
What is to be made of a future that turns out this way? First and
foremost, of course, it must be established whether a true prognosis
has been given; and if not in exact detail, at least in general terms.
Next, should the future be as bleak as it appears, perhaps it must be
recognized that very little can at present be done to remove personal
risk except by fostering such stoical reserves as are necessary to face
the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. But what of culture,
society and civilization? For these also appear to be at risk from the
course of events we describe. Does one perhaps comfort oneself with
the thought that not all would be lost since it is a reasonable
expectation that some archaeologist, thousands of years hence, is
bound to recover the essential achievements of our civilization,
preserved in London, say, beneath a silted-up Thames? Alternatively,
does one perhaps take strength from the known capabilities of the
human race, on the basis, for example, that an engineer or physicist,
also thousands of years hence, is bound once again to invent the
internal combustion engine? Or does one picture a world peopled by
then with a race of Frankenstein monsters, indifferent to all but
themselves? That is, should one envisage a swarm in the sky which is
also the bearer of a cosmic imprint capable of affecting cellular life
and marking out a new small branch in the evolutionary tree? Is
civilization, indeed, simply a cul-de-sac, a diversion before a new
dominant species — ‘homo unsapiens’ we might suppose — inherits
the earth?
Science has no answer to these questions. Indeed, those who might
be expected to contribute to the answer are not at the moment
interested. The environment in which our planet moves is supposed
to be empty, and to pose little threat. We shall show, however, that
the reality is different; that an unrecognized hazard is out there; and
that at a stroke, civilization could be plunged into a new Dark Age.
The future shocks described herein are the logical consequence of
new discoveries which have been emerging over the past few years.
Some preliminary findings were described in an earlier book, The
Cosmic Serpent, but the analysis has since been greatly extended,
and we did not there deal with the implications for the future. That
omission is here rectified. As we anticipated, some ‘authorities’
reacted to the book with outrage, and indeed the reader should be
warned: much of what he may have regarded as established truth will
in these pages also turn a somersault.
In June 793, ‘fierce foreboding omens came over the land and
wretchedly terrified the people’, signs that are said to have been
followed by great famine. On 25 June 1178, the Moon, more or less in
line with the Earth, was apparently struck by a missile whose energy
was ten times that of the combined nuclear arsenals of the world. On
30 June 1908, an object from space exploded above a remote area of
Siberia with the energy of a large hydrogen bomb. More recently,
during five days in late June 1975, an unexpected swarm of boulders
the size of motor cars struck the Moon at a speed of 67,000 miles an
hour. And then again, on 30 June 1994, there came an unheralded
explosion with the strength of a 20-megaton bomb ...
Why late June? What is the nature of these events? And what is the
actual threat they pose for mankind? Such are the questions we
address in this book. For within these last few years, it has been
found that there is a great swarm of cosmic debris circulating in a
potentially dangerous orbit, exactly intersecting the Earth’s orbit in
June (and November) every few thousand years. More surprisingly,
perhaps, it has been found that the evidence for these facts was in the
past deliberately concealed. When the orbits exactly intersect
however, there is a greatly increased chance of penetrating the core
of the swarm, a correspondingly enhanced flow of fireballs reaching
the Earth, and a greatly raised perception that the end of the world is
nigh. This perception is liable to arise at other times as well,
whenever fresh debris is formed, but deep penetrations occurred
during the fourth millennium BC, again during the first millennium
to come.
Christian religion began appropriately enough therefore, with an
apocalyptic vision of the past, but in the aftermath of the last deep
penetrations, once the apparent danger had passed, truth was
converted to mythology in the hands of a revisionist church and such
prior knowledge of the swarm as existed, which now comes to us
through the works of Plato and others, was later systematically
suppressed. Subsequently the Christian vision of a permanent peace
on Earth was by no means universally accepted, and it was to
undergo several stages of ‘enlightenment’ before it culminated with
our present secular version of history, to which science itself
subscribes, perceiving little or no danger from the sky. The lack of
danger is an illusion however, and the long arm of an early Christian
delusion still has its effect. The Cosmic Winter, then, is a
kaleidoscope of history and science, reviving the basis of an old and
largely misunderstood pagan view of the world.
The idea of a terrible sanction hanging over mankind is not, of
course, new. Armageddon has been widely feared in the past and it
was a common belief that it would arrive with the present
millennium. During the last thousand years, moreover, it has usually
been the reforming church that revived the fear. But such ideas,
whenever they have arisen, have always met with fierce opposition.
Sometimes the proponents of such ideas escape to new found lands
where in due course they meet opposition of a homegrown kind. In
the United States for example, despite freedom of speech, old
traditions of cosmic catastrophe have recurred from time to time,
even in the present century, only to be confronted by pavlovian
outrage from authorities. That being the case, it is perhaps ironic
that elections in the United States are generally held in November
following the tradition of an ancient convocation of tribes at that
time of the year, which probably had its roots in a real fear of worldend as the Earth coincided with the swarm.
In Europe the millennium was finally dispensed with when an
official ‘providential’ view of the world was developed as a counter to
ideas sustained during the Reformation. Indeed to hold anything like
a contrary view at this time became something of a heresy and those
who were given to rabble-rousing for fear of the millennium were
roundly condemned. To the extent that a cosmic winter and
Armageddon gave aspects in common, therefore, authoritarian
outrage is nothing new.
More to the point perhaps, the way in which the British parliament
handles its affairs seems to have its roots in the condemnation of the
heresy. Thus the mother of parliaments, once its present charge was
assumed, began by turning against the founding sect known as
Ranters. Ranters rose to prominence in the period immediately
following the execution of the English king and the foundation of the
Protectorate. But they are heard of very little these days and it is not
commonly known that Ranters took their lead in 1649 from one
Gerrard Winstanley who was moved by ‘super-natural illuminations’,
along with many others, to anticipate the millennium.
In the event, the ‘destroying angel’ failed to materialize, the ranting
parliamentarians came to look foolish and it was only a matter of
time before the reins of power passed to others of a more
sophisticated persuasion whose vision of the world embodied the
kind of ‘enlightenment’ that has sustained western civilization ever
since. Enlightenment, of course, builds on the providential view and
treats the cosmos as a harmless backdrop to human affairs, a view of
the world which Academe now often regards as its business to
uphold and to which the counter-reformed Church and State are only
too glad to subscribe. Indeed it appears that repeated cosmic
stress — supernatural illuminations — have been deliberately
programmed out of Christian theology and modern science, arguably
the most influential contributions of western civilization to the
control and well-being of humanity.
As a result, we have now come to think of global catastrophe,
whether through nuclear war, ozone holes, the greenhouse effect or
whatever, as a prospect originating purely with ourselves; and
because of this, because we are faced with ‘authorities’ who never
look higher than the rooftops, the likely impact of the cosmos figures
hardly at all in national plans. Indeed, even those who do look higher
are mostly content simply to weave plausible hypotheses from the
harmony they observe in the visible spheres, and eschew any
reference to cosmic hazards in the process.
And if the overall climate of our globe should once again improve, as
it is doing during this century, and has done every few centuries
since the end of the last ice age, there may be unaware that the
cosmos is simply delaying the next input of dusty debris, alarm,
destruction and death. A great illusion of cosmic security thus
envelopes mankind, one that the ‘establishment’ of Church, State and
Academe do nothing to disturb. Persistence in such an illusion will
do nothing to alleviate the next Dark Age when it arrives. But it is
shattered; one simply has to look at the sky.
The outrage, then, springs from a singularly myopic stance which
may now place the human species a little higher than the ostrich,
awaiting the fate of the dinosaur.