Book 2 [originally Book 8 ]
<On Lightning and Thunder>
(1.1) The entire investigation of the universe is divided into the study
of the heavens, the air, and the earth. The first part examines the
nature of the heavenly bodies and the size and shape of the fires by
which the world is surrounded: whether the heaven is solid and made
of hard, dense matter, or woven from delicate, fine matter; whether it
undergoes motion or causes it;1 and whether it has the stars beneath
itself or bedded in its structure; how it maintains the seasons of
the year and turns the sun back;2 and further questions of this sort.
(2) The second part deals with things that go on between the heav-
ens and the earth. Here are clouds, rain, snow, <winds, earthquakes,
lightning-bolts>, “and thunder that will stir up human minds,”3 ev-
erything the air does or has done to it. We call these things “high up”4
because they are more elevated than the lowest level. The third part
investigates water, earth, trees, plants, and, to use the lawyers’ term,
everything that is connected to the soil.
(3) “How come,” you say, “that you included the study of earth-
quakes in the place where you are going to talk about thunder and
lightning-bolts?” Because, since a quake is produced by breath, and
breath is air set in motion, even if it goes beneath the earth, it should
not be considered there: it should be examined in the place that na-
ture allocated to it. (4) I shall tell you something that you will find
even more surprising: earth will have to be discussed in the context
of the heavens. “Why?” you ask. Because we discuss topics concerning
the earth itself in its own place: whether it is broad, unsymmetrical,
and irregular in shape, or it all tends toward the shape of a ball, and
moulds its parts into a sphere; whether it binds the waters or is bound
by them; whether it is a living creature or a lifeless body without
sensation, filled with breath, but not its own;5 and so on. Whenever
such questions are being handled, they will stay with the earth and be
put in the lowest category. (5) But when one is inquiring what is the
earth’s location, in which part of the world it has settled, what its po-
sition is relative to the stars and heavens, this inquiry will defer to the
higher-ranking ones and, so to speak, will acquire a superior status.
163book two
164
(2.1) Since I have spoken about the parts into which all of nature’s
matter is divided,6 some general points need to be made: and this
must be taken on board first, that air is one of the bodies that pos-
sess unity. You will realize what this means and why it needs to be
established at the outset if I go into the topic a bit more deeply and
say that some things are continuous, some composite.7 Continuity
is the joining together of parts without any gap; <compositeness> is
contact between two bodies that are joined together; unity is con-
tinuity without compositeness. (3) Can there be any doubt that of
the bodies that we see and handle, that either are perceived or can
be, some are composite (they are formed by either binding, or ac-
cumulation, <or construction>, for example, a rope, a heap of grain,
a ship), while others are not composite (such as a tree or stone)? So
you must agree that in the case of things that elude our senses but
are grasped by reason, some of these too possess bodily unity. (4) See
how I am making things easier on your ears: I could have solved my
problem if I had been willing to use philosophers’ jargon and talk of
unitary bodies. Since I am sparing you that, do me a favor in return.
“How do you mean?” Whenever I say “one,” remember that I am
referring not to quantity but to the property a body has of cohering
not through any external assistance but through its own unity. Air is
a body of this type.
(3.1) All the things that are known to us or can become known
are contained within the world. Some of them are parts of the world;
some just have the status of matter. For all of nature needs matter,
just as all the manual arts do. (2) I shall make this clearer: the eye,
the hand, bones, and nerves are parts of us; the juice formed from
recently eaten food, which will turn into parts, is matter. Then blood
is a quasi-part of us, because <it is a part>, and yet it is also matter;
for it renews the vital organs, and nevertheless it counts as one of the
things from which our whole body is composed.
(4.1) In the same way air is a part of the world, and a necessary
one. For it is what links heaven and earth, what separates the lowest
and the highest levels and yet joins them: it separates them because
it comes in between; it joins them because through it they can com-
municate with each other; whatever it receives from the earth, it
passes upward, and, conversely, it spreads energy from the heavenly
bodies over things on earth. (2) By quasi-part of the world, I mean,165
On Lightning and Thunder
for example, animals and trees; for the whole class of animals or trees
is a part of the universe, because it is included in its totality, and the
universe cannot exist without it; but a single animal or a single tree
is a quasi-part, because even if it perishes, that from which it per-
ishes remains a whole. Now air, as I was saying, coheres with both
heaven and earth; it is naturally linked to each of them. Whatever is
a natural part of anything possesses unity; for no natural organism
lacks unity.
(5.1) Earth is both part and matter of the world. I do not think
you will ask why it is a part, unless you also ask why the heavens are
a part: because, of course, the universe cannot exist without the one
any more than without the other, because the universe contains the
things of which <it is composed. Then again, the earth is matter of
the world,> since from it nourishment is apportioned to all the ani-
mals, all the plants, all the heavenly bodies; (2) from it provision is
made for each thing individually and for the world itself with all its
numerous demands; it produces nourishment for all those heavenly
bodies, which are so energetic, so eager, by day and night, in both
their activity and their feeding.8 All things by nature seize enough
for their own nourishment, and the world has appropriated as much
as it needed for eternity. I shall offer you a tiny illustration of this
important fact: eggs contain enough liquid to generate the creature
that will emerge.
(6.1) Air is continuous with the earth and connected to it in such
a way that it will immediately occupy any space from which the earth
withdraws. It is a part of the whole world, but nevertheless it receives
whatever the earth emits for the nourishment of the heavenly bodies,
so that it should be reckoned as matter, not as a part. This is the cause
of all its instability and turbulence.
(2) Some people form air from discrete particles,9 like dust. They
could not be further from the truth. For there can be no pressure
except from a body bound together in unity, since the parts need to
agree and combine their forces to produce tension. If air is chopped
up into atoms, it is scattered; but dispersed things cannot be in ten-
sion. (3) The tension of air will be revealed to you by things that are
inflated and do not give way when they are hit; it will be revealed by
heavy objects transported a great distance as the wind carries them; it
will be revealed by voices, which are faint or clear depending on howbook two
166
the air is excited. For what is a voice but tension in the air produced
by the tongue striking it so as to be audible? (4) What is running, and
every form of motion? Are they not the activities of breath in ten-
sion? That gives strength to sinews and speed to runners. That, when
it is violently agitated and whips itself up, tears up trees and woods,
seizes whole buildings, and smashes them high in the air. That stirs
up the sea, which is naturally sluggish and still. (5) Let us consider
smaller-scale phenomena. What music is there without breath in
tension? Horns and trumpets, and instruments that by water pressure
make a louder sound than can be produced with the mouth,10 do they
not perform their function thanks to air in tension? Let us look at
things that exert great force invisibly: tiny seeds, slim enough to fit
in the crevices between stones, grow so big that they dislodge huge
bits of masonry and destroy monuments; very small, very fine roots
sometimes split rocks and cliffs. What else is this but breath in ten-
sion, without which nothing is strong, and against which nothing is
strong? (6) One can infer that unity is characteristic of air just from
the fact that our bodies hold together. What else could make them
cohere, apart from breath? What else is there that moves our mind?
What motion could it have except tension? What tension, except
from unity? What unity, unless it existed in air? What else produces
fruit, makes weak, green corn stand upright, and makes trees either
spread their branches out or grow up high, apart from the tension
and unity of breath?
(7.1) Some people tear air apart and divide it into particles,11 mix-
ing void with it. They think they have a proof that it is not a solid
body, but contains a lot of vacuum, in the fact that birds can move so
easily in it, and the largest and the smallest things can pass through
it. (2) But they are wrong: movement in water is just as easy, and
there is no doubt about its unity, for water makes way for bodies by
constantly flowing backward in the opposite direction to the bodies
for which it makes way. Our writers call this “closing-round”; the
Greeks call it antiperistasis. This occurs in air just as in water; for it
closes round every body by which it is displaced. So there will be no
need for a mixture of void. But more of this another time.12
(8) There is no need to spend <a long time> proving that there are
some violent, powerful things in nature. Now, nothing is very violent
except as a result of tension, and equally, by Hercules, nothing will be167
On Lightning and Thunder
able to acquire tension from another thing unless something is in ten-
sion in itself; for, in the same way, we say that nothing can be moved
by another thing unless there is something that can move of itself.13
Now what has a more credible claim to possess tension in and of itself
than breath? Who will deny that it has tension when he sees the earth
and its mountains being shaken, along with buildings and walls, large
cities with their populations, and seas with their entire coastlines?
(9.1) The tension of breath is demonstrated by its speed and ex-
pansion. The eyes instantly project their rays for many miles; a single
shout reaches an entire city at once; light does not creep along gradu-
ally but spreads over everything at once. (2) Also, how could water
be in tension except through breath? Do you doubt that the spray
that rises up from the foundations in the middle of the arena and
carries saffron scent right up to the highest level of the amphitheatre
is produced by tension in the water? Yet neither the hand nor any
other mechanism, but only breath, can push or propel the water: it
puts itself at breath’s disposal; it ascends as breath is introduced and
compels it; it struggles repeatedly against its own nature and rises up,
although by nature it flows down. (3) What? Do ships weighed down
by cargo not demonstrate clearly that it is not water that prevents
them from sinking, but breath? For water would give way and could
not support heavy weights if it were not supported itself. A discus
dropped from above onto a pool does not sink but bounces back up
again: how, unless breath repels it? (4) How else are voices transmit-
ted through the barrier of house walls except because air is present
even in solids, picking up a sound produced outside and passing it
on to the adjoining area? Obviously by means of breath it imparts
tension not just to what is open, but to what is invisible and enclosed
too; which is easy for it to do, because nowhere is it divided, but it
unites with itself right through the middle of objects that seem to
break it up. You may put walls and high mountains in the way, and
it will be prevented from granting passage through all that to us, but
not to itself. The only thing that is blocked is our route in pursuit
of it; the air itself can go through the very thing that divides it, and
it does not merely flow round the intrusion and encircle it on both
sides, but passes right through it.14
(10.1) Air extends from the clearest part of the aether right down
to the earth. It is nimbler, thinner, and higher than the earth, thanbook two
168
the waters too, but it is denser and heavier than the aether and is in-
trinsically cold and dark; its light and heat come from elsewhere. But
it is not uniform throughout its whole extent; it is altered by what is
closest to it. (2) Its highest region is very dry and hot, which makes
it very rarefied too, because of the proximity of the eternal fires, all
those heavenly bodies in motion, and the constant revolution of the
heavens. Its lowest region, close to the earth, is dense and murky,
because it receives the earth’s exhalations. Its middle region, if you
compare the highest and lowest parts, is more moderate in respect
of dryness and rarefaction but colder than both the other regions.
(3) For its upper levels feel the heat of the nearby heavenly bodies.
Its lower levels are warm too: first from the earth’s exhalation, which
brings with it a lot of heat; then because the sun’s rays are reflected
back and gently warm the air with double the amount of heat as far
as they are able to retrace their course. Another source of its heat is
the warm breath that all animals, trees, and plants contain (for noth-
ing could live without heat). (4) Then add the fires, not just those lit
by human hand and plain to see, but the ones hidden by the earth;
some of them have erupted, but countless others constantly blaze in
unseen, hidden depths. All the fertile regions of the earth possess
some warmth, since cold is sterile, but heat is productive. So the
middle section of the air, remote from these influences, remains in
its cold state; for air is cold by nature.
(11.1) Since the air has these divisions, in its lowest region it is
particularly variable, restless, and changeable. Near the earth it often
takes the initiative and is often passive; it suffers harassment, and it
harasses. It is not all affected in the same way, but differently at dif-
ferent points, and it is unsettled and troubled only in parts. (2) The
causes of its changeability and restlessness derive, some of them,
from the earth, whose positions, facing in this direction or that, have
great influence on the condition of the air. Other causes derive from
the motions of the heavenly bodies. You should assign the leading
role among them to the sun: it guides the year; its turning causes the
cycle of winters and summers.15 Next most influential is the moon;
but the other stars too influence things on earth no less than the
breath that lies close to the earth; and by their motion, or by their
countermotion,16 they confusedly cause sometimes cold, sometimes
rain and other harsh conditions on the earth.169
On Lightning and Thunder
(3) It was necessary to say all this by way of preface before speak-
ing about thunder, lightning-bolts, and lightning-flashes.17 For since
they occur in the air, a description of its nature was needed to make
it more readily apparent what it could do or have done to it.
(12.1) There are three phenomena: lightning-flashes, lightning-
bolts, and thunder, which is produced at the same time but heard
later. A lightning-flash displays fire, a lightning-bolt ejects it: the first
is, so to speak, a threat and an attempt that fails to strike home; the
other is a throw that does strike home. (2) There are some points on
which everybody is agreed, some on which there are different opin-
ions. It is agreed that all these phenomena are produced in clouds
and from clouds; it is additionally agreed that both lightning-flashes
and lightning-bolts either consist of fire or look like fire. (3) Let us
now pass on to the contested points: some people think that fire
is present in the clouds; some think that it is produced for the oc-
casion and is not present before it is emitted. Those who produce
the fire beforehand cannot agree among themselves either, for they
gather it together from different sources. Some say that the sun’s
rays run backward and forward, criss-crossing repeatedly, and set the
fire alight. Anaxagoras says that it trickles down from the aether;18
from the immense heat of the heavens, many particles fall down, get
trapped in clouds, and are preserved there for a long time. (4) Aris-
totle does not think that the fire is gathered long beforehand,19 but
thinks it leaps out at the same moment as it is produced. His view
is as follows: “Two parts of the world lie at its lowest point, earth
and water. Each emits something: the vapor coming from earth is
dry and smokelike, producing winds, lightning-bolts and thunder;
water’s exhalation is moist and turns into rain and snow. (5) But that
dry vapor coming from earth, which is the source of winds, once it
is massed together, gets squeezed out by the clashing of clouds in
violent motion; then, with this powerful propulsion, it will strike ad-
jacent clouds. The impact of the blow is accompanied by a noise like
the one produced in our fires when a flame crackles because the fire-
wood is too green; for there too breath that contains some moisture
and is massed together is exploded by the flame. In the same way the
breath, which I said a moment ago is forced out by colliding clouds,
when it is driven against other clouds, can be neither <extinguished
nor> exploded in silence. (6) The noises are varied because the cloudsbook two
170
are varied, some having a larger hollow, others a smaller one. Now,
the powerful mass of breath that is ejected is fire, and it is called a
lightning-flash; it is set ablaze by a slight impact, and is feeble. We
see the flash before we hear the sound because our eyesight is swifter
and runs way ahead of our hearing.”
(13.1) The view of those who store fire in the clouds is wrong,
as many arguments can demonstrate. If fire falls down from the
heavens, why does it not happen every day, since the heat is always
constant up there? Then they have not given any reason why fire,
which nature summons upward, should flow down. For the situa-
tion is quite different with our fires, from which sparks do fall down;
they possess a certain amount of weight, and so the fire does not
descend but is plunged and pulled down. (2) Nothing like this will
happen in that completely pure fire in which there is nothing to be
propelled downward; or if any part of it does fall down, the whole of
it is endangered, because anything that can lose bits can all fall down.
Then is what falls light or heavy? Is it light? Then it cannot tumble
down: anything prevented from falling by lightness will maintain its
elevated position. Is it heavy? How could it ever be in a place from
which it was possible to fall? (3) “Tell me, then, are not some fires
regularly brought down to a lower level, such as the very things we
are investigating, lightning-bolts?” I agree. However, they do not go,
they are carried; some force pushes them down, and that is not in
the aether, where there is no unjust coercion, no disruption, nothing
abnormal. (4) Everything is ordered, and the purified fire, which
has been assigned the highest place in the protection of the world,
encircles the outer edge of this quite beautiful structure. It cannot
descend from there, but neither can it be compelled by anything
outside itself, because in the aether there is no room for any unstable
body, and stable, ordered things do not do battle.
(14.1) “All of you, I declare, when you are explaining the causes of
shooting stars, say that certain sections of the air can attract fire from
the heat of the higher region and thus be set ablaze.” But it makes a
great difference whether someone says that fire falls downward from
the aether, which nature does not permit, or says that heat jumps
across from that powerful fire to the regions below. For the fire does
not fall from up there, which is impossible, but it is started down
here. (2) Certainly in our own experience, when a fire spreads far and171
On Lightning and Thunder
wide, we see some blocks of houses heat up over a long period and
then catch fire spontaneously; so it is likely that, in the highest level
of the air as well, something capable of catching fire is set ablaze by
the heat of the aether above it. For it must be the case both that the
lowest level of the aether contains something like air, and that the
highest level of the air is not unlike the lowest level of the aether,
since the transition between the two different things is not instanta-
neous. At the boundary they gradually blend their properties, so that
you could be unsure whether it is still air or already aether.
(15) Some of our people think that air, because it can change
into fire and water, does not attract some new source of flame from
elsewhere: for it sets itself alight by its motion, and when it shatters
clouds that have dense, compacted hollows, it inevitably produces an
enormous noise as such large bodies are torn apart. This battle, as the
clouds reluctantly surrender, contributes to the fire’s being set ablaze,
in the same way as a hand contributes to a blade’s cutting, but cutting
is the function of the blade.
(16) What is the difference between a lightning-flash and a
lightning-bolt? I shall explain: a lightning-flash is fire spread far
and wide; a lightning-bolt is concentrated fire ejected vigorously.
We sometimes hold water in our two cupped hands, then force it
out, as if from a pump, by pressing our palms together. Imagine that
something similar happens up there too: the narrow gap between two
clouds that are pressed together ejects the breath in between, and in
the process sets it alight and hurls it like a catapult. For ballistas and
scorpions also make a noise as they fire their weapons.20
(17) Some people think that fiery breath moving through cold
and moisture generates the noise. For red-hot iron is not silent either
when it is plunged in liquid: if a glowing lump is lowered into water,
it is extinguished with a loud noise.
According to Anaximenes,21 breath colliding with clouds produces
thunder, and as it struggles to get through the obstacles in its way and
tears them apart, in the process of escaping it ignites the fire.
(18) Anaximander referred all <these> phenomena to breath:22
“Thunder,” he said, “is the sound of a cloud being struck.” Why is it
uneven? Because the <breath> is too. Why does thunder also occur
in a clear sky? Because then as well breath leaps forth through dense,
torn air. Yet why is there sometimes no lightning-flash, but there isbook two
172
thunder? Because weaker breath was not strong enough to produce a
flame but was strong enough to produce a noise. So what exactly is a
lightning-flash? Turbulence caused by air spreading out and rushing
together again,23 revealing a weak fire that will not escape. What is a
lightning-bolt? The rapid motion of more violent, denser breath.
(19) Anaxander says that all these phenomena are produced by
energy descending from the aether to lower levels:24 thus fire strikes
cold clouds with a noise. When it tears them apart, there is a flash,
and fire with lower energy produces lightning-flashes; with higher
energy, lightning-bolts.
(20.1) Diogenes of Apollonia says that some thunder is produced
by fire,25 some by breath: fire produces the thunder that it itself pre-
cedes and announces; breath produces the form that crashes without
any flash. (2) I admit that each can sometimes be effective without
the other, with the proviso that their properties are not completely
distinct, but each can be produced by the other. For who will deny
that breath propelled with great force, when it has generated a noise,
will also generate fire? Who will not also admit that sometimes fire
too can burst into a cloud but fail to escape, if it has torn through
a few clouds, but is overwhelmed by a conglomeration of many of
them? So fire can turn to breath and lose its brightness, and also
breath can ignite air as it slices through it. (3) Add that the impetus
of a lightning-bolt, since it has crashed into the air with such a huge
impact, must both send breath on ahead, driving it forward, and pull
a wind along behind; and so everything trembles before it is struck,
shaken by the wind that the fire has pushed along in front of it.
(21.1) Now we dismiss our teachers and start to proceed indepen-
dently, and from agreed points we pass on to uncertain ones. What
is agreed? That a lightning-bolt is fire, and so is a lightning-flash,
being nothing other than a flame that would have been a lightning-
bolt if it had had more power; they differ not in their nature but
in their force. (2) That they are fire is demonstrated by their color,
which is not produced by anything else. Their effects demonstrate
this too: for often lightning-bolts cause great conflagrations; forests
have been burned down by them, and city districts; even things that
have not been struck by them can be seen to have been burnt, and
some things are blackened with soot, as it were. Then think of how
everything struck by lightning smells of sulphur. (3) So it is agreed173
On Lightning and Thunder
that both phenomena are fire, and both differ in their motion and
their location: for a lightning-flash is a lightning-bolt that has not
traveled right down to earth, and, conversely, you might say that a
lightning-bolt is a lightning-flash that has been brought right down
to the earth. (4) I am not going over the same point at great length
for the sake of verbal gymnastics, but to prove that these things are
related and of the same kind and nature. A lightning-flash is almost a
lightning-bolt. Let us turn that around: a lightning-bolt is something
more than a lightning-flash.
(22.1) Since it is agreed that both of them are fire, let us see how
fire is generally produced at our level; for it will be produced in the
same way higher up as well. <It is produced> in two ways: one, if it is
lit by <striking>, as from a stone; the other, if it is elicited by friction,
as when two sticks are rubbed together for a long time. (Not every
type of wood will achieve this for you, only types suitable for extract-
ing fire, such as laurel, ivy, and others familiar to herdsmen for this
purpose.) (2) So it can happen that clouds as well produce fire in the
same way when either struck or rubbed. Let us consider with what
force storms rage, with what energy whirlwinds rotate: anything in
their way is shattered, and seized, and thrown far from its starting
point. (3) So is it remarkable if such great energy forces <fire> out of
something else or out of itself ? For you see how much heat will be
felt by bodies that undergo friction as those winds pass by. And you
should not imagine that this occurs only in the case of things whose
immense power is generally acknowledged: (23.1) perhaps clouds as
well, when driven into another cloud by a wind that pushes and gen-
tly persists, will elicit a fire that shines out but does not leap out; for
less energy is required to produce a lightning-flash than to produce
a lightning-bolt. (2) Above, we showed how hot some things be-
come through friction. Now then, since air can change into fire, and
it is subjected to a very powerful frictional force (namely, its own)
when it turns into wind, it is likely that fire is emitted; but the fire
is temporary and bound to die down quickly, since it is not starting
in solid material or material in which it can become established. So
it is transient, and its duration is only as long as its journey and its
course; it has been ejected without fuel.
(24.1) “How is it,” someone asks, “that, although you say it is the
nature of fire to head for higher levels, the lightning-bolt heads forbook two
174
the earth? Either <that is untrue or> what you said about fire is un-
true, for it can travel up or down equally well.” Both statements can
be true. For fire by nature rises to a point,26 and if nothing prevents
it, it ascends; just as water by nature moves downward, but if some
force is applied to turn it in the opposite direction, it is directed
toward the place from which it fell as rain. (2) A lightning-bolt <is
flung downward> by the same overwhelming force by which it is
ejected. What happens to these fires is what happens to trees whose
tops can be pulled down till they point to the ground, even, if they are
supple, till they touch it; but when you let go, they will spring back
to their original position. So you should not focus on a state that is
contrary to the inclination of the thing in question. (3) If you allow
fire to go where it wants, it will head for the heavens, the home of
all the lightest things; when there is something that collides with it
and diverts it from its instinctive motion, then not nature but slavery
has issued the orders.
(25) “You tell us,” someone says, “that clouds emit fire when they
rub against one another, even though they are moist, or, better, sod-
den. So how can they generate fire, which is no more likely <to be
produced> from a cloud than from the water <which> originates
from the cloud?” (26.1) First, clouds do not contain water, but air that
is dense and ready to generate water; it has not yet turned into it but
is already inclined and tending that way. You should not think that
the water first collects and then pours down; it is produced and falls
at the same moment. (2) Then, if I grant that clouds are moist and full
of ready-formed water, all the same, nothing will prevent fire being
given off from something moist, and indeed, what you will find more
surprising, from moisture itself. Some people have maintained that
nothing can change into fire without first changing into water; so a
cloud can emit fire from some part of it while preserving the water
it contains, just as often one part of a piece of wood is burning while
another is sweating. (3) I am not saying that these things are not op-
posed to each other and are not eliminated by each other, but when
fire is more powerful than moisture, it wins; and, conversely, when the
amount of moisture is greater, then the fire is ineffective; and so green
wood does not burn. It depends on how much water a thing contains;
for a tiny amount will not impede or stop the force of the fire. (4) Of
course not. Within our ancestors’ memory, as Posidonius records,27175
On Lightning and Thunder
when an island was rising up in the Aegean sea, during the daytime
the sea foamed, and smoke rose up from the depths, but it was only
nighttime that revealed the fire. This was not continuous, but flashed
at intervals, like lightning-bolts, whenever the subterranean heat
had overcome the weight of water that lay above it. (5) Then stones
and rocks were hurled out, some of them intact, expelled by breath
before they were burnt, some of them eaten away and rendered as
light as pumice. Finally the tip of a burnt mountain emerged; after-
ward its height increased, and the rock grew to the size of an island.
(6) The same happened within our memory in the second consulship
of Valerius Asiaticus.28 Why have I mentioned all this? To make it
clear that the fire was not extinguished by the sea that covered it, and
its force was not prevented from escaping by the weight of a great
volume of water. Asclepiodotus,29 the student of Posidonius, records
that the depth from which the fire ripped through the waters and
emerged was two hundred feet. (7) Now, if the enormous force of the
water could not stifle the force of the flames rising from the sea-bed,
how much less will the fine, dewy moisture of clouds be able to stop
a fire? Far from slowing it down, it is actually one cause of the fire,
which we do not see flashing except from an overcast sky. A clear sky
is free from lightning-bolts; a cloudless day does not harbor those
terrors, nor does nighttime except when darkened by clouds. (8) “Tell
me, then, does not lightning sometimes occur even when the stars
are visible and the night is peaceful?” However, you may be sure that
there are clouds in the region from which the flash comes, but the
curvature of the earth prevents us from seeing them. (9) Add that it
is possible that low clouds close to the ground undergo friction and
emit fire, which is forced higher up and appears in a region of the
sky that is clear and cloud-free, although it is produced in a cloudy
region.
(27.1) Some people have distinguished different kinds of thunder,
saying that there is one with a deep rumble, such as precedes an
earthquake when a wind is trapped and roars. I shall explain how
they believe it is formed. (2) When clouds have trapped breath inside
themselves, the air eddies within their hollows and makes a noise
like bellowing; it is hoarse, steady, and continuous, at least when the
region is moist and prevents any escape, and so this kind of thun-
der is a sign that rain is on the way. (3) Another kind of thunder isbook two
176
harsh and sharp—I should call it a crack rather than a noise—such
as we are used to hearing, for example, when a bladder is burst over
someone’s head.30 This kind of thunder is emitted when a cloud has
accumulated and is shattered, driving out the breath with which it
had been inflated. This can properly31 be called a crash, sudden and
powerful. Its occurrence makes people collapse and die; some live in
a daze and completely lose their senses—we call them thunderstruck,
when that noise from the heavens has deranged their minds. (4) It
can also be produced when air is shut in a hollow cloud, is rarefied
by its motion, and expands; then while it tries to find more space for
itself, it endures a noise caused by the things that envelop it. And
anyway, just as hands struck together produce a clap, can a noise not
come from clouds as they collide together, a big noise, because big
objects are clashing?
(28.1) “We see clouds striking a mountain,” someone says, “but no
noise being produced.” First of all, they do not produce a noise irre-
spective of how they collide, but only if their structure is well-suited
to emitting one. Strike the backs of your hands together and they will
not produce a clap, but palm meeting palm will do so; and it makes a
great deal of difference whether they are slightly cupped as they are
struck together, or flat, or extended. Then, the clouds must not just be
moving, but must be propelled by a powerful, stormy force. (2) Then
again, a mountain does not split a cloud but divides it, separating it
one bit at a time. Even a bladder does not make a noise irrespective of
how it ejects the breath: if it is sliced with a knife, it escapes without
making any impression on the ears; it must be burst, not cut, to make
a noise. I maintain the same about clouds: unless they have shattered
in a powerful impact, they do not make a noise. Add that clouds
driven against a mountain do not burst but pour round it, and they
strike some parts of the mountain before the mountain itself; they
envelop trees, branches, bushes, and sharp, projecting rocks in such a
manner that if they contain any breath, they emit it at many different
points. But unless it all bursts out at once, it does not produce a crash.
(3) So that you can be certain of this, a wind that divides around a
tree whispers but does not thunder. A broad impact, so to speak, one
that disperses the whole mass in a moment, is required for a noise to
erupt such as is heard when there is thunder.177
On Lightning and Thunder
(29) In addition, air is naturally suited to sounds. Obviously
enough, since a sound is just air that is struck. Therefore clouds that
are both hollow and tensed need to be pushed against each other.
You see how hollow objects are much more resonant than solid ones,
and things in tension much more than things that are slack. That is
how drums and cymbals make a noise, because the former set up a
vibration in the resistant breath inside them, and the latter only ring
when the bronze is concave.
(30.1) Some people, including Asclepiodotus, think that thunder
and lightning-bolts can be emitted by the clash of dry bodies as well.
Etna once overflowed with a large quantity of fire and poured out
an enormous mass of burning sand; daylight was shrouded in dust,
and the sudden darkness terrified whole peoples. On that occasion,
they say, there were then numerous lightning-bolts and thunderclaps,
which were produced by the clash of dry bodies, not of clouds, which
are unlikely to have been present when the air was so hot. (2) Once
Cambyses sent an army to Ammon,32 and sand, whipped up by a
south wind and falling like thick snow, covered it and then buried
it. It is likely that on that occasion too thunder and lightning-bolts
were produced by the friction of sand against sand. (3) This view does
not contradict our own assumptions: for we have said that the earth
gives off particles of both kinds,33 that both dryness and moisture are
milling around throughout the atmosphere. So if something like that
is involved, it forms a solider, denser cloud than if it were constructed
just from pure breath, (4) and that cloud can burst and emit a noise.
The phenomena I have mentioned, whether they fill the air with
burning fires or with winds that scour the earth, must make a cloud
before they make a noise. Clouds can be formed by dry materials
just as by moist ones; for, as we have said,34 a cloud is a concentrated
mass of dense air.
(31.1) The effects of a lightning-bolt, should you wish to exam-
ine them, are amazing and leave no doubt that its power is divine
and subtle. Silver coins are melted together inside boxes that remain
intact and unharmed. Sheaths are unaffected, while their swords
are melted, and the entire metal head trickles down a spear while
its wooden shaft remains undamaged. Wine stands rigid after the
wine-jar is broken, but its solidity lasts for no more than three days.35book two
178
(2) Among the remarkable effects you can also include the fact that,
when humans and other animals are struck, their heads face toward
the exit point of the lightning-bolt,36 and that when trees have been
struck, splinters always fly up on the opposite side to the lightning-
bolt. Then what do you make of the fact that, when dangerous snakes
and other animals with deadly secretions are struck by a lightning-
bolt, all the poison is consumed? “How do you know?” someone
asks. Worms are not produced in bodies that contain poison;37 but
when they have been struck by a lightning-bolt, they produce worms
within a few days.
(32.1) What do you make of the fact that lightning-bolts indicate
the future, and do not give signs of just one or two events, but often
predict a long, connected series of fated events, and do so with plain
indications, much clearer than if they were written down?38 (2) There
is this difference between us and the Etruscans, who have the great-
est expertise in the investigation of lightning-flashes: we think that
lightning-bolts are emitted because clouds collide;39 they think that
clouds collide in order that lightning-bolts may be emitted. For since
they ascribe everything to god, they are of the opinion that they do
not indicate the future because they have occurred, but they occur
because they are intended to indicate the future. But they occur in
the same manner whether indicating the future is their purpose or
just a consequence. (3) “So how do they indicate the future if they
are not sent for that very purpose?” Just as birds do not move in order
to be seen by us, yet they produce favorable or unfavorable auspices.
“They too are set in motion by god,” someone objects. But you make
him into somebody with too much time on his hands, a servant per-
forming a very trivial task, if he arranges omens for some people and
entrails for others.40 (4) They are just as much the results of divine
agency if birds’ wings are not guided by god, and the entrails of cattle
are not formed under the very axe. The sequence of fated events un-
folds in a different way, sending out signs of the future at every point,
some of them familiar to us, some unknown. Everything that hap-
pens is a sign of some future event. Chance events and purposeless,
chaotic ones do not admit of divination; where there is order, there
is also predictive force. (5) “So why is the eagle granted the honor of
giving auspices of important events, or the raven and a tiny number
of other birds, while the voices of the rest lack prophetic power?”179
On Lightning and Thunder
Because some things have not yet been incorporated into the system,
and some never could be, because our acquaintance with them is too
remote. However, there is no living creature that does not foretell
something by its movement and by an encounter with us. But, to be
sure, not everything gets noticed.
(6) An auspice belongs to an observer, and so it relates to the
person who has paid attention to it.41 But even the ones that go to
waste do occur. (7) The observations of the Chaldaeans have recog-
nized the influence of the five stars.42 Well, do you think that all those
thousands of heavenly bodies shine without any job to do? What else
leads the experts on horoscopes into most serious error but the fact
that they assign control over us to just a few stars, although all the
stars overhead claim a share of us for themselves? Perhaps the lower
ones exert their influence on us from closer quarters, and they move
more frequently, and keep changing the aspect with which they look
at us.43 (8) But even those that either are motionless or look motion-
less because their speed is comparable to that of the universe are not
excluded from rights and control over us. They regard us from differ-
ent aspects and share round the responsibilities as they carry on their
business. It is not easy to know what they are capable of, but equally
it should not be doubted that they are capable of something.
(33) Now let us return to lightning-bolts. The system is divided
into these three areas: how we inspect them, how we interpret them,
how we expiate them. The first part concerns the type;44 the second,
divination; the third, propitiation of the gods. One must pray to them
when there is a good lightning-flash and ask them for mercy when
there is a bad one: pray that they would confirm what is promised,
ask for mercy so that they will withdraw their threats.
(34.1) They regard the lightning-bolt as the most powerful, be-
cause whatever is foretold by other things is annulled by the inter-
vention of a lightning-bolt; and whatever it foretells is fixed, and
not altered by the meaning of another portent. Whatever threats are
issued by entrails or birds will be canceled by a favorable lightning-
bolt; whatever is announced by a lightning-bolt is not proved wrong
either by entrails or by a bird that contradicts it. (2) On this point
they seem to me to be mistaken. Why? Because nothing is more true
than truth. If birds have sung about the future, this auspice cannot be
invalidated by a lightning-bolt; otherwise it was not the future thatbook two
180
they sang about. For I am not now comparing a bird and a lightning-
bolt, but two signs of the truth, which, if they indicate the truth, are
of equal standing. So if the intervention of a lightning-bolt annuls
any indications from entrails or augury, then the entrails were not
properly examined, or the auguries were not properly observed. It
makes no difference which thing has the grander appearance or the
more powerful nature; if they both give indications of the truth, in
this respect they are of equal standing. (3) If you should say that flame
is more powerful than smoke, you will not be mistaken; but as indica-
tions of fire, flame and smoke are equally significant. So if they are
saying, “Whenever entrails indicate one thing, and lightning-bolts
another, the lightning-bolts will have greater authority,” perhaps I
shall agree. If they are saying, “Although one of them had predicted
the truth, the strike of the lightning-bolt did away with the previ-
ous signs and won acceptance for itself,” that is false. Why? Because
it does not matter how many auspices there are: there is only one
fate, and if that is properly understood from the first auspice, it is
not annulled by the second. (4) This is what I am saying: it does not
matter if we are searching for something by a different means, be-
cause what we are searching for is the same. Fate cannot be altered
by a lightning-bolt. Of course not, for the lightning-bolt is itself a
part of fate.
(35.1) “Well then, what is the point of expiations and purifica-
tory sacrifices if the fates are immutable?” Allow me to speak for
that severe sect of people who greet all these things <with derision>,
and regard them as nothing but consolation for a troubled mind.
(2) The fates pursue their rights in a quite different manner: they
are not moved by any prayers; they cannot be swayed by pity, or by
favoritism; they have started an irreversible course and surge ahead
according to plan. Just as the water in rapid torrents does not run
back on itself and does not even pause, because what comes along
behind propels what is in front, so the eternal chain of events makes
the course of fate roll onward; and its first law is this: to abide by
what is decreed.
(36) For what do you understand by fate? I regard it as a necessity
governing all events and all actions, which no force can disrupt. If you
think it can be placated by sacrifices or by the life of a snow-white
lamb, you do not know the divine. All of you say that even a wise181
On Lightning and Thunder
man cannot change his mind; that is much more true of god, since a
wise man knows what is best at the present moment, but everything
is present to god’s divine nature!
(37.1) Now I want to present the case for those who think that
purificatory sacrifices should be used against lightning-bolts and
who have no doubts that expiation is effective, sometimes for the
prevention of dangers, sometimes for their reduction, sometimes for
their postponement. (2) I shall pursue the consequences of this view
shortly. For the moment, they have this in common with us, that
we also think that vows are beneficial, without any infringement of
the power and influence of fate. For some things are left undeter-
mined by the immortal gods, so that they can have a good outcome
if prayers are offered to the gods, or if vows are undertaken; so this is
not contrary to fate, but is itself contained within fate.
(3) “Either it’s going to happen or it’s not,” someone says. “If it’s
going to happen, it will happen, even if you do not undertake vows.
If it’s not going to happen, even if you do undertake vows, it will
not happen.” Your dilemma is invalid, because you are ignoring the
proviso that falls between those alternatives: this will happen, but
only if vows are undertaken.
(38.1) “But,” someone says, “fate must also cover this very point,
that you either undertake vows or you do not.” Regard me as sur-
rendering to you and conceding that the fact that vows will occur is
also covered by fate: therefore they will occur. (2) It is fated that one
man should be eloquent, but only if he learns to read; the same fate
includes the point that he should learn to read: therefore he must be
taught.45 This man will be wealthy, but only if he goes to sea; but in
the sequence of fated events that promises him a large fortune, this
too is necessarily included, that he should also go to sea: therefore
he will go to sea. It is the same with expiations, I tell you: someone
will escape the dangers if he expiates the divinely predicted threats;
but it is also fated that he should expiate them; therefore he does
expiate them. (3) Such arguments are commonly used against us to
prove that nothing is left to our will, and that full rights over our ac-
tions are handed over <to fate>. When I am dealing with that topic,
I shall explain how something is left to the individual’s decision,
though fate remains intact. But for the present I have explained what
is under discussion, how, if the course of fate is fixed, expiations andbook two
182
placatory sacrifices can avert the dangers of prodigies: the reason
being that they do not compete with fate, but they themselves are
subject to fate’s law. (4) “So what use is a diviner to me?” you ask.
“For it is necessary for me to perform the expiation in any case, even
if he does not advise it.” He is of use because he is a servant of fate;
in the same way, although we are indebted to fate for good health,
we are also indebted to the doctor, because fate’s kindness reaches us
through his hands.
(39.1) Caecina says that there are three kinds of lightning-flashes,46
advisory, authoritative, and what is called situational.47 The advisory
kind occurs before action but after deliberation, when people are
considering some action and are either advised to do it or advised
against it by the stroke of a lightning-bolt. The authoritative kind
comes after an action, and indicates that it will turn out for good or
bad. (2) The situational kind occurs when a lightning-bolt intervenes
while people are resting, not doing anything, and not even consider-
ing any action; it delivers a threat, or a promise, or a warning. He
calls this the warning kind, but I do not see why it is not the same as
the advisory kind; for someone who gives a warning gives advice too.
(3) But let us grant that there is a difference, and let us distinguish
the warning kind from the advisory, because the latter advises both
for and against actions, whereas the former covers only the avoidance
of imminent danger (as when we fear fire, deception by those near-
est to us, or a treacherous attack <by ***>48 or by slaves). (4) What is
more, I can see a further difference between them too: the advisory
kind occurs when one is considering some action; the warning kind
when one is not considering any. Each kind has its own distinct
character: advice is given to those who are deliberating, but people
receive warnings out of the blue.
(40.1) Now in the first place these are not types of lightning-bolt,
but types of meaning. For the types of lightning-bolt are as follows:
the one that drills, that shatters, and that burns. The type that drills
is fine and flamelike, and escapes by a very narrow route on account
of the untainted, pure thinness of the flame. (2) The type that shatters
is concentrated, and a lot of dense, stormy breath is mixed in with it.
And so the first type of lightning-bolt returns and escapes through
the same aperture by which it entered when the blow struck; the
second has widely dispersed energy that breaks up what it hits and183
On Lightning and Thunder
does not bore through it. (3) The third kind, which burns, contains a
lot of earthy matter and is fiery rather than flamelike; and so it leaves
behind extensive signs of the fire, and they remain in the stricken
objects. Of course no lightning-bolt occurs without fire, but all the
same we call this kind fiery in a strict sense because it imprints clear
traces of heat, because it either burns or blackens. (4) It burns in three
ways: either it singes and causes only slight damage, or it burns up,
or it sets ablaze. These all involve burning, but of different kinds and
degrees: whatever is burned up is also necessarily burned, but what
is burned is not necessarily burned up; (5) likewise what is set ablaze
<is necessarily burned as well, but what is burned is not necessarily
set ablaze>: for fire may have burned it as it passed through. Who
does not realize that some things are burned without being on fire,
but nothing is on fire without being burned as well? I shall add one
more point: something can be burned up but not set ablaze and can
be set ablaze but not burned up. (6) Now I move on to the type of
lightning-bolt that blackens what it strikes. This either discolors or
colors. I shall explain what is distinctive about each: a thing is dis-
colored when its color is spoilt, not changed; it is colored when its
appearance becomes different from what it was, for instance, blue or
black or pale.
(41.1) Up to this point the Etruscans and the philosophers share
the same ideas, but they differ when they think that lightning-bolts
are sent by Jupiter, and they give him three manubiae.49 The first one,
according to them, gives advice and is gentle, and is sent on the deci-
sion of Jupiter himself. The second one is sent by Jupiter, but on the
advice of his council: for he summons the twelve gods.50 This kind
of lightning-bolt sometimes does some good, but not without doing
harm at the same time; even its benefits come at a price. (2) The third
manubia is sent by Jupiter again, but after he has summoned to his
council the gods they call higher and hidden,51 because it destroys
what it strikes and invariably changes the private or public situation
that it encounters. For fire allows nothing to remain as it was.
(42.1) Here, should you wish to examine the matter, antiquity at
first sight seems to be mistaken. For what is so ignorant as the belief
that Jupiter sends lightning-bolts from the clouds, aims at columns,
trees, sometimes his own statues, and strikes harmless cattle, while
leaving temple-robbers, assassins, and arsonists unpunished? thatbook two
184
Jupiter summons gods to his council, as though his own judgment
were not good enough? that the lightning-bolts that he shoots on
his own are favorable and gentle, but those whose firing is attended
by a larger crowd of divinities are harmful? (2) If you ask me for my
own view, I do not think that they were so stupid as to believe that
Jupiter’s choices were unfair or that his aim was not very good. When
he hurled fires that struck the innocent and passed by the wicked, did
he have no wish to throw them more justly, or did he not succeed in
doing so? (3) So what was their purpose when they said this? In order
to control the minds of the ignorant, those very wise men pointed
to an inescapable object of fear. In order that we should be afraid
of something superior to us, it was expedient, in the face of such
audacious wickedness, for something to exist that nobody thought
himself powerful enough to oppose; and so, to strike terror into those
for whom innocence has no attraction unless fear is the driving force,
they placed overhead an avenger, and one who was armed.
(43.1) So why is the lightning-bolt that Jupiter sends on his own
a gentle one, and the one that he has consulted about and sent on
the advice of the other gods a harmful one? Because Jupiter, that is
the king, must help people even on his own, but must harm only
when others share the decision. (2) Let all those who have acquired
great power within human society learn that even a lightning-bolt
is not sent without taking advice. Let them call a meeting, consider
the opinions of many, restrain those who are inclined to do harm;
let them keep this in mind, that when something needs to be struck
down, not even Jupiter can rely just on his own judgment.
(44.1) And another point: they were not so ignorant as to think
that Jupiter changes his weapons. It suits poetic license to say:
There is another less heavy lightning-bolt, to which the
Cyclops’ right arm
has added less savagery and flame, less anger;
the gods call them the second-rank weapons.52
(2) But those most eminent men were not guilty of the error of think-
ing that Jupiter sometimes uses <heavier, sometimes> lighter light-
ning-bolts, like weapons used for training. But they wanted to warn
those who have to hurl lightning-bolts against human wrong-doings185
On Lightning and Thunder
that they should not all be struck in the same way: some should be
grazed, some shot down and shattered, some given a warning.
(45.1) Nor did they believe that Jupiter throws lightning-bolts
with his hand, like the one we worship on the Capitol and in other
temples.53 They recognize the same Jupiter as we do, the ruler and
guardian of the universe, the mind and breath of the world, the mas-
ter and the craftsman of this creation, for whom every name will be
appropriate.54 (2) Do you want to call him fate? You will not be mis-
taken: he it is on whom everything depends, the cause of causes. Do
you want to call him providence? You will be right: he it is by whose
deliberation provision is made for this world, so that it can advance
unhindered and unfold its actions. (3) Do you want to call him na-
ture? You will not be wrong: he it is from whom everything is born,
by whose breath we live. Do you want to call him the world? You are
not mistaken: for he himself is all this that you see, contained in his
own parts, sustaining both himself and his creation. The Etruscans
too believed the same, and they said that lightning-bolts are thrown
by Jupiter because nothing happens without him.
(46) “But why does Jupiter either pass by things that deserve to
be struck, or strike harmless things?” You are summoning me to a
wider inquiry, which must be allocated its own date, its own place.
In the meantime I say this, that lightning-bolts are not thrown by
Jupiter, but everything has been so arranged that even things that
are not done by him do not happen without reason; and that comes
from him. For even if Jupiter is not doing those things now, Jupiter
ensured that they would be done. He does not handle individual
things, but he has given everything its power and its cause.
(47) I do not agree with them about the following classifica-
tion: they say that lightning-bolts are either perpetual, or limited,
or extendable. They are perpetual when their significance applies to
a whole life and does not announce one event, but embraces a com-
bination of events that will occur from that moment on throughout
the person’s entire lifetime; these are the lightning-bolts that occur
immediately after an inheritance has been received, or when a person
or city faces a new situation. The limited ones always present them-
selves on a particular day. The extendable ones can have their threats
deferred but not averted and eliminated.book two
186
(48.1) I shall explain why I do not agree with this classification.
The lightning-bolt they call perpetual is also limited (for it equally
presents itself on a particular day and is not any the less limited just
because it signifies many events), and what they think is extend-
able is limited (for on their own admission there is a fixed maxi-
mum length to the deferral that can be granted: they say that private
lightning-bolts cannot be deferred beyond ten years, public ones not
beyond thirty years; which means they also are limited, because there
is a cut-off point beyond which they cannot be extended). So every
lightning-bolt and every outcome has an appointed day; for what is
uncertain cannot be grasped.
(2) They describe the things to look for in lightning-flashes in a
disorganized, rambling fashion, although they could classify them as
they were classified by Attalus the philosopher,55 who had devoted
himself to this discipline. Then they would look for where it occurred;
when; for whom; what he was doing; what type and what size it was.
If I want to go into all the ramifications of this subject, then what
shall I do? I shall be embarking on an endless task.
(49.1) Now I shall quickly sketch the categories of lightning-flash
proposed by Caecina and shall explain what I think of them. He
says there are postulatory ones, by which sacrifices that were inter-
rupted or not correctly performed are demanded afresh; monitory
ones, which tell one what to guard against; pestilential ones, which
foretell death and exile; fallacious ones, which bring harm under the
guise of some good (they bestow a consulship that will turn out badly
for the holder or an inheritance whose profits must be paid for with
some great loss); pronged ones,56 which announce the appearance of
danger without the substance; (2) annulling ones, which remove the
threats of earlier lightning-bolts; attesting ones, which agree with
earlier ones; *** 57 ones, which occur in an enclosed space; buried ones,
which hit things that have been struck before but not expiated; royal
ones, when the marketplace or the assembly place is affected, or the
most important locations in a free city—they indicate that the state
is threatened with monarchy; (3) infernal ones, when the fire has
sprung out of the earth; hospitable ones, which summon Jupiter to
us by means of sacrifice and58, to use their milder word, invite him
(but he would not grow angry if he were invited: as it is they declare
that his arrival brings great danger to the people consulting him); and187
On Lightning and Thunder
helpful ones, which come in response to an appeal, but to the benefit
of those calling on them.
(50.1) How much simpler is the classification used by our Attalus,
a splendid man, who had combined the learning of the Etruscans
with Greek acuteness. There are some lightning-bolts that indicate
something that concerns us, <some that indicate what does not con-
cern us,> and some indicate either nothing, or something of which
we have no understanding. (2) Of those that indicate something,
some are favorable, some hostile, <some mixed,> some neither hos-
tile nor favorable. The categories of hostile ones are as follows: they
foretell harm that is either unavoidable, or avoidable, or capable of
reduction, or of deferment. Favorable ones indicate either lasting or
transient circumstances. (3) Mixed ones either contain partly good,
partly bad, or they change bad to good or good to bad. They are
neither hostile nor favorable if they indicate to us some action that
should neither frighten nor delight us, or a journey involving no ele-
ment of fear or hope. (51) I return to the lightning-bolts that indicate
something, but it is of no concern to us; for example, that the same
lightning-bolt as has already occurred will occur again in the same
year for the same person. Nothing, or something that eludes our
knowledge, is indicated, for instance, by the ones that are showered
on the immense sea or on empty wildernesses; their meaning is either
nonexistent or lost.
(52.1) I shall add a few more illustrations of the power of the
lightning-bolt, which does not cause the same sort of damage in
every material. It shatters stronger things very violently, because they
resist, but it sometimes passes harmlessly through things that yield.
It clashes with stone, iron, and the hardest objects, because it must
find a way through them by force; and so it forges an escape route.
But it spares soft and less dense things, even if they seem readily
inflammable, because it is given an easy passage, and its arrival is
gentler. And so, as I have said,59 boxes remain intact, while the money
that was in them is found fused together, because the very fine fire
passes through hidden passageways, but it conquers anything solid
and obstinate that it finds inside the wood. (2) It does not rampage
in only one way, as I have said,60 but you will deduce what its vio-
lence has achieved in each instance from the precise nature of the
damage, and you will recognize the lightning-bolt from its effect.book two
188
Sometimes the violence of one and the same lightning-bolt produces
many different effects in the same material. For example, in a tree it
burns the driest parts; it drills through and shatters the hardest and
densest parts; it scatters the outer bark; it bursts and tears the inner
bark; and it perforates and strips off the leaves. It freezes wine and
melts iron and copper.
(53.1) It is remarkable that wine that has been frozen by a
lightning-bolt,61 when it returns to its previous state, either kills
people or drives them mad if they drink it. As I am wondering why
this happens, the following occurs to me: there is a deadly power in
the lightning-bolt; it is plausible that some breath from it remains in
the liquid that it has congealed and frozen, for it could not have been
solidified without some kind of binding-agent being added to it.
(2) Besides, olive oil and perfumes of every sort have a foul smell
after a lightning-bolt, from which it is clear that this very subtle
fire, driven along contrary to its own nature, contains a deadly force
that not only destroys what it strikes but <spoils> what it scorches.
Besides, it is well established that, wherever a lightning-bolt falls,
the smell of sulphur is found; being oppressive by nature, if inhaled
repeatedly it drives people insane.
(3) But we shall return to these topics when we have time. Per-
haps we shall want to show how all these discoveries have flowed
from philosophy, the parent of the arts. It first investigated the causes
of events, observed their effects, and—the most effective method in
the investigation of lightning-bolts—it compared the outcomes of
events with their beginnings.
(54.1) Now I shall get back to Posidonius’s opinion.62 The earth,
and everything made of earth, produces exhalations, partly damp,
partly dry and smoky; the latter is the fuel of lightning-bolts, the
former of rain. Any dry, smoky stuff that reaches the air does not
tolerate being shut up inside clouds but bursts what encloses it; that
creates the sound we call thunder. (2) Also, in the air itself anything
that expands simultaneously becomes dry and warm. This too, if it
is enclosed, seeks an escape in the same way and exits with a noise;
sometimes it breaks out all at once, and so thunders more violently;
sometimes bit by bit, gradually. (3) So this breath produces thunder
while it either bursts clouds or flies through them; the turbulence of
breath trapped in a cloud is a most powerful form of friction.189
On Lightning and Thunder
Thunder, I believe, is nothing other than the noise of air being
struck, and it cannot be struck unless it is causing either friction or
bursting. (55.1) “But,” someone objects, “the impact you are looking
for also occurs if clouds collide with each other.” But not entirely; for
whole things are not clashing with whole things, but parts with parts;
and soft things do not make a noise unless they are dashed against hard
things. So a wave is not heard except when it breaks. (2) “Fire, when
plunged in water,” someone says, “makes a noise as it is extinguished.”
Suppose it does: that supports my view. For it is not fire that is mak-
ing the noise, but breath escaping through whatever is extinguishing
the fire. Even if I grant you that fire is both produced in a cloud and
extinguished there, it is generated by breath and friction. (3) “Tell me,
now,” someone says, “can’t one of those shooting stars fall into a cloud
and be extinguished?” Let us suppose that this too can happen some-
times; we are now looking for a natural, constantly present cause, not
an occasional, accidental one. Take it that I admit the truth of what
you say, that sometimes fires resembling slanting shooting stars flash
out after thunder: but that was not the cause of the thunder; rather,
the thunder was produced while that was happening.
(4) Clidemus says that a lightning-flash is not fire but an empty
illusion;63 for at night the sea gleams in the same way when oars
move through it. But the analogy is not close: for there the gleam is
seen within the water itself, whereas the gleam produced in the air
bursts and leaps out.
(56.1) Heraclitus64 thinks that a lighting flash is like what we
see when a fire is trying to get going, like the first, unsteady flame,
alternately dying down and flaring up again.
People in the old days called this fulgetrum. We speak of tonitrua
[thunder] in the plural, but in the old days they spoke of tonitrus or
tonus. (I have discovered this in Caecina, a good stylist, who would
once have had a reputation for eloquence, if he had not been over-
shadowed by Cicero.) (2) In the old days they also used a word that
we use with one syllable lengthened: for we say fulgēre [to flash], just
like splendēre [to gleam]; but to indicate this burst of sudden light
from the clouds, they were in the habit of saying fulgěre with a short
middle syllable.65
(57.1) You ask what my own view is; for so far I have been lending
a hand to other people’s opinions. I shall tell you: there is lightningbook two
190
when a light suddenly flashes over a wide area. This occurs when, as
clouds are becoming less dense, air turns into fire but does not find
the strength to rush any further forward. (2) You are not surprised,
I suppose, either that movement rarefies the air, or that the rarefac-
tion sets it on fire. In the same way a sling-stone liquefies when shot
from a sling; drops are formed on it by friction with the air, just as
by fire. So there are a lot of lightning-bolts in summer because there
is a lot of heat, and fire is generated more easily by the friction of
hot things. (3) Both a lightning-flash, which merely shines, and a
lightning-bolt, which is propelled, are produced in the same way.
But the former is weaker and has less fuel, and, to express my view
succinctly, a lightning-bolt is an intensified lightning-flash. So when
hot, smoky matter is emitted from the earth, encounters clouds, and
swirls around within their hollows for a while, it eventually breaks
out, and, since it has no strength, there is a bright flash; (4) but when
these lightning-flashes have more fuel and blaze up with greater
force, they do not merely appear, but they fall. Some people think
that a lightning-bolt always returns,66 others think that it sometimes
comes to rest, when the fuel weighs it down, and the lightning-bolt
is driven downward with a weaker impact.
(58.1) But why is the lightning-bolt short-lived and its fire not
continuous and steady? Because it is very swift, and its motion is as-
tonishing: it bursts the clouds and ignites the air at the same time,
but then the flame dies away as its movement comes to rest. For the
swift progress of the breath is not persistent enough to allow the fire
to be prolonged. But whenever it is set on fire more vigorously in
the turbulence, it attempts a break-out; then, after it has escaped,
and the struggle is ending, the same causes sometimes bring it right
down to the earth, or sometimes it fizzles out first, if it was ejected
with less force. (2) Why does it travel in zigzag fashion? Because it
consists of breath, and breath zigzags and meanders; and because na-
ture summons fire upward, violence pushes it downward. Its course
starts to zigzag while neither force surrenders to the other, and
the fire struggles to rise higher but is pushed down lower. (3) Why
are mountain tops frequently hit? Because they confront the clouds,
and whatever falls from the sky has to pass by them.
(59.1) I know what you have long been wanting, what you are
clamoring for: “I would rather,” you say, “not be afraid of lightning-191
On Lightning and Thunder
bolts than understand them. So tell other people how they occur; I
want to have my fear of them dispelled, not their nature explained.”
(2) I obey your summons; for every topic, every conversation, should
contain something that furthers our well-being. When we have tra-
versed the secrets of nature, when we have examined the divine, our
mind must be set free from its ills and constantly strengthened. This
is essential even for experts who devote themselves exclusively to this
pursuit, not so that we may escape the blows of circumstance (for
weapons are being thrown at us from all directions), but so that we
may endure them bravely and resolutely. (3) We can be undefeated,
but we cannot be unshaken, though sometimes the hope that we can
also be unshaken sneaks up on us. “How do I achieve this?” you ask.
Treat death with contempt, and then you have treated all the causes
of death with contempt, whether wars or shipwrecks, or the attacks
of wild animals, or the weight of debris from a building that suddenly
collapses. (4) Can they do any more than separate the body from the
mind? No carefulness can avoid this, no good fortune can exempt us
from it, no power can overcome it. Fortune varies her allocations of
other things, but death summons everybody alike; whether the gods
are angry or well disposed, we must die. (5) Let our desperate situ-
ation be a source of courage. The most faint-hearted animals have
been created by nature to run away, but when no escape is available,
they try to fight with their unwarlike bodies. No enemy is more
deadly than one emboldened by being cornered, and necessity al-
ways inspires a much more violent struggle than courage does; or at
any rate the efforts of a great mind and of a desperate one are equal.
(6) Let us consider ourselves lost, as far as death is concerned; and
so we are. Yes, Lucilius, we are all being preserved for death. All the
people you can see, all you can visualize anywhere else, will soon
be recalled by nature and laid to rest. There is no question about the
fact, just about the date: sooner or later we have to reach the same
point. (7) So, does the person who ingratiatingly begs for death to
be delayed not seem to you the most cowardly and foolish of all?
Would you not despise someone who, when placed in the ranks of
those about to die, asked as a favor to be the last to face the execu-
tioner? We do the same: we place great value on dying later. (8) Ev-
eryone has been sentenced to death, and the sentence is entirely just,
because (and this is always an enormous consolation to those aboutbook two
192
to face death) those whose case is identical suffer the same fate. We
would comply if we were handed over by a judge or magistrate, and
would obey our executioner: what difference does it make whether
we go to our death because of their orders or because of our birth?
(9) How foolish you are, how forgetful of your fragility, if you fear
death only when there is thunder! Is that how it is? Does your safety
depend on that? Will you live if you escape a lightning-bolt? You will
be targeted by a sword, by a stone, by bile. The lightning-bolt is not
the greatest of the dangers you face but the showiest. (10) I suppose
you will be hard done by if its infinite speed prevents you from being
aware of your death, if your death receives expiatory sacrifices, if you
are not superfluous even as you breathe your last, but are an omen of
some important event. I suppose you are hard done by if you are bur-
ied along with a lightning-bolt.67 (11) But you panic at the crashing
of the heavens and tremble at an empty cloud, and whenever there
is a flash, you are terrified. So, do you think it more honorable to die
from diarrhea than from a lightning-bolt? Well then, stand more
bravely in the face of threats from heaven,68 and when the world is
ablaze all around, remember that you possess nothing that requires
such a great death to destroy it. (12) But if you think that the turmoil
of the heavens and the strife of the storms is being arranged for your
sake, if the clouds are gathering and colliding and crashing on your
account, if such powerful fires are being unleashed for your destruc-
tion, then count it a comfort that your death is so important. (13) But
you will have no opportunity for such reflection: this calamity spares
us from fear, and among its other benefits is this, that it is swifter
than our anticipation of it. People only ever fear the lightning-bolt
they have escaped.