Book 4b [originally Book 3 ]
On Clouds, <Rain, Hail, Snow>
[The first part of this book is missing in our manuscripts. From references
in the surviving chapters, we know that the missing chapters discussed
dew, frost, hail, and snow (cf. 4b.3.6; 13.2), and doubtless also clouds and
rain; and Anaxagoras was mentioned (cf. 4b.3.6). There may also be traces
of the missing part of the book in an anonymous medieval work (see Hine,
“Seneca and Anaxagoras in Pseudo-Bede’s De mundi caelestis terrestris-
que constitutione,” Viator 19 (1988): 111–28).]
(3.1) . . . if I assure you that hail is produced in the same way as ice
is produced at our level, when the entire cloud is frozen, I will be
behaving too recklessly. So count me as one of those second-rank
witnesses, who say they did not see anything.1 Or I too shall behave
like the historians: after they have told as many lies as they like,
they are unwilling to vouch for one particular detail, but add, “The
authority for this will rest with the sources.” (2) So if you do not re-
ally believe me, Posidonius will guarantee you his authority both for
what has been said and for what is to follow. For he will assure you,
just as though he had been there, that hail is produced from a cloud
that is already watery and turning to liquid. (3) The reason for its
roundness you could discover even without a teacher, once you have
noticed that drops always form a sphere. That can be seen on mirrors
that collect moisture when someone breathes on them, and on cups
that get splashed, and on any other kind of smooth surface. Likewise
if drops cling to leaves, they assume a rounded shape.
(4) What is harder than rock? What is softer than water?
Yet hard rocks are hollowed out by soft water.2
Or, as another poet says, “The fall of a drop hollows out a stone.”3 The
hollow that is produced is itself round, from which it is clear that the
thing that does the hollowing is similar: for it carves out for itself a
place with its own shape and form. (5) Besides, even if the hail was not
this shape originally, it can become round as it falls, and, as it rolls over
and over during its descent through a motionless expanse of dense air,
65book four B
66
it can be worn down evenly to a spherical shape. This cannot happen
to snow, because it is not as solid, or rather because it is loose-textured;
and it does not fall from a great height, but starts out near the earth.
So its descent through the air is not lengthy but localized.
(6) Why should I too not allow myself the same liberty as Anax-
agoras allowed himself ? 4 Equal freedom ought to exist among phi-
losophers more than any other group. Hail is nothing other than ice
in suspension; snow is suspended frost. For we have already said that
the difference between dew and water is the same as the difference
between frost and ice, and also as that between snow and hail.5
(4.1) I could dismiss myself, with the inquiry completed, but I
shall give good measure, and since I have begun to annoy you, I shall
address all the inquiries that people make on this topic. They inquire
why in winter there is snow but not hail, and why hail falls in spring,
when the cold weather has already lost its grip. To confess the truth
to you, I am <easily> persuaded; I guarantee to be gullible enough
to believe those less serious lies for which people generally get their
face slapped, not their eyes gouged out. (2) In winter the air is cold
and so does not yet turn to water, but to snow, which is closer to air.
When spring begins, a greater change in the air ensues, and in the
warmer sky larger drops are formed. So, as our Virgil says, “when
showery spring pours down,”6 there is a more vigorous transforma-
tion of the air, which spreads and expands in all directions, helped by
the warmth. So the rain showers that fall are heavy and widespread
rather than prolonged. (3) In winter, rain is lingering and slight, such
as often occurs when light, fine rain has snow mixed in with it; we
talk about a snowy day when it is very cold and the sky is overcast.
Also, when the north wind is blowing or dominating the weather, the
raindrops are fine; in the south wind the showers are more violent
and the drops fuller.
(5.1) There is a point made by our people that I dare not either
mention, since it seems flimsy, or omit. But what harm is there in
writing something for a more lenient judge too? Indeed, if we start
applying strict quality control to all our arguments, silence will be in
order. For few of them go unopposed, and the rest, even when they
win, still have to contest the case. (2) Our people say that in spring
in the region of Scythia and the Black Sea and the north, everything
that has been iced up and hard starts to thaw; then frozen rivers67
On Clouds, Rain, Hail, Snow
start to move, then blanketed mountains melt their snows. So it is
plausible that cold currents of breath come from there and mix with
the spring sky. (3) They also add a point that I have not put to the
test, and am not thinking of doing so—you also, I suggest, if you
want to investigate the truth, should test the snow on a Carian:7 they
say that people walking on firm, hard snow get less cold feet than
people walking on soft, slushy snow. (4) So, if they are not mistaken,
everything that comes from the northern regions once the snow is
breaking up and the ice is cracking binds and constricts the air in the
south, which is already warm and moist. So what would have been
rain turns to hail when assaulted by the cold.
(6.1) I cannot stop myself from going on to expose all the follies
of our people. They declare that some people are expert at observ-
ing clouds and predict when hail is going to occur. They could have
learned this by experience, when they noted the cloud color that was
always followed by hail. (2) What is incredible is that at Cleonae
there were publicly appointed chalazophulakes,8 people who watched
out for hail coming. When they had given a signal that hail was
imminent, what do you suppose? That people ran for their cloaks or
their waterproofs? No, they all performed their own sacrifices, one
person with a lamb, another with a chicken. Instantly those clouds
turned away, once they had tasted a bit of blood. (3) That makes you
laugh? Listen to what will make you laugh even more. If anyone had
neither a lamb nor a chicken, as an inexpensive alternative he turned
on himself, and, so that you do not think clouds are greedy or cruel,
he pricked his finger with a really sharp stylus and performed a sac-
rifice with the blood. The hail turned away from his tiny farm no less
than from those where it had been appeased with larger victims.
(7.1) They try to find an explanation for this. Some of them, as is
appropriate for people of their great wisdom, deny the possibility of
anyone bargaining with hail and buying off storms with little gifts—
even though gifts win over the gods as well.9 The others say they
suspect that the blood itself contains some force capable of diverting
and repelling a cloud. (2) But how could such a tiny amount of blood
contain a force great enough to reach so high and have an effect
on the clouds? How much easier to say, “It’s a lie, it’s fiction.” But
the people of Cleonae used to grant permission for those who were
assigned the task of forecasting storms to be brought to trial on thebook four B
68
charge of allowing the vineyards to be battered or the crops flattened
through their negligence. In our society too the Twelve Tables10 have
a clause forbidding anyone from putting a spell on another person’s
crops. (3) The uneducated people of old believed that rain could be
both attracted and repelled by incantations. It is so evident that all
this is impossible that you need not attend any philosopher’s school
to learn it.
(8) I shall add one further point, and then you will want to cheer
and clap.11 They say that snow is produced in the region of the sky
that is close to the earth. For this contains more heat, for four rea-
sons: one, that every evaporation from the earth, since it contains a
lot of hotness and dryness, is warmer the more recently formed it is;
secondly, that the sun’s rays rebound from the earth and run back on
themselves: this doubling of their force warms things that are close
to the earth, which contain more heat because they feel the sun twice
over; the third reason is that the higher regions are more windswept,
and anything lower down is buffeted less by the winds. (9) In addi-
tion to these there is Democritus’s explanation:12 “The more solid a
body is, the more quickly it absorbs heat, and the longer it retains
it. So if you leave a bronze vessel, a glass one, and a silver one in the
sun, heat will enter the bronze one more quickly and will stay there
longer.” He then goes on to say why he thinks this happens. “Bodies
that are harder and more compressed,” he says, “must contain smaller
passageways, with more rarefied breath in each of them. It follows
that, just as smaller baths and smaller boilers warm up more quickly,
so these hidden, invisible passageways both feel heat more swiftly,
and because of that same narrowness give off more slowly what they
have received.”
This long introduction is leading up to the topic under investiga-
tion. (10) The closer any air is to the earth, the denser it is. Just as in
water and any kind of liquid the sediment is at the bottom, so in the
air too the most concentrated bits sink to the bottom. It has already
been demonstrated that the denser and solider the material anything
is made of, the more staunchly it preserves the heat it has received.
The more distant the upper air is from the filth of the earth, the purer
and clearer it is; so it does not retain the sun’s heat but passes it on as
if through a vacuum. Therefore it does not become so warm.69
On Clouds, Rain, Hail, Snow
(11.1) Against this, some people say that mountain tops ought
to be warmer, the closer they are to the sun. They seem to me to be
mistaken in thinking that the Apennines and the Alps, and other
mountains famous for their exceptional height, rise so high that their
size can feel the closeness of the sun. (2) They are high so long as they
are being compared with us; but when you look at the universe, the
modest height of all of them is evident. They are outdone by, or outdo,
each other, but none rises high enough for even the greatest of them
to have any significance in comparison to the whole universe. If this
were not so, we would not say that the whole earth is a ball. (3) The
properties of a ball are roundness and a degree of evenness. You must
realize that this is the evenness you see in balls used in games: the
seams and the cracks do not really prevent them from being described
as equal in every direction. Just as in this kind of ball those gaps are
no obstacle to its appearing round, in the same way lofty mountains
are no obstacle in the case of the whole earth either; their height is
swallowed up in a comparison with the whole world. (4) Anyone who
says that a higher mountain, because it receives the sun’s rays from
a closer position, ought to be warmer, may as well say that a taller
person ought to be warmed more quickly than a tiny person, and the
head more quickly than the feet. But anyone who measures the world
on its own scale, and considers that the earth occupies just a pinprick,
will realize that nothing can project far enough from the earth to
feel the influence of the heavens more strongly, as though it had got
closer to them. (5) Those mountains that we look up at, and those
peaks covered with perpetual snow are nevertheless at the bottom; a
mountain is closer to the sun than a plain or valley, but in the same
way as one hair is thicker than another. On that basis, one tree will
also be said to be closer to the heavens than another; which is false,
since there cannot be a big difference between tiny things, except in
comparison with each other. When it comes to comparison with an
enormous body, it makes no difference how much bigger one is than
the other, because even if the difference is great, still minimal things
are being outdone <by other minimal things>.
(12) But to return to the topic, for the reasons I have given, most
people think that snow is produced in the part of the air that is ad-
jacent to the earth, and that it is less tightly bound together becausebook four B
70
it is formed by less severe cold. The adjacent air is both too cold to
turn into water and rain, and not cold enough to harden into hail.
In this moderate, not-too-intense cold, snow is formed as the water
is compacted.
(13.1) “Why,” you ask, “do you pursue so energetically these absurd
inquiries, which make a person more learned, not more virtuous? You
tell us how snow is formed, though it is much more important to us
that you tell us why snow should not be purchased.” Are you instruct-
ing me to bring an action against luxury? That is a daily struggle,
and a fruitless one. But let us bring the action all the same; even if
luxury is going to win, let it overcome people who are fighting and
struggling. (2) Tell me now, do you think that this investigation into
nature has no bearing on what you are looking for? When we ask
how snow is formed and say that it resembles frost, that it contains
more breath than water, do you not think it is a rebuke to people if,
given that buying water is shameful, what they are buying is not even
water? (3) Let us inquire into how snow is formed rather than how
it is preserved; since, not content with bottling wines and arranging
our wine cellars by flavor and age, we have found ways of packing
snow so that it can overcome the summer and be protected against
the heat of the season by the coldness of its location. What have we
achieved by these efforts? Well, obviously, that we trade in water, even
though it is free. We are unhappy that we cannot pay for breath or
for sunshine, that the air is readily available without payment even to
the refined and the wealthy. O how hard done by we are, that nature
has let anything remain readily available! (4) She wanted this stuff to
flow and be accessible to everyone, she has made it publicly available
for all living beings to drink, she has poured it out generously and
abundantly for both humans and wild beasts, birds, and the idlest of
animals to use. But luxury, inventive to its own detriment, has given
it a price tag. You see, absolutely nothing can please luxury unless
it is expensive. This was the one thing that reduced the wealthy to
the same level as the masses, the one thing in which they could not
outdo the poorest. For the person who is burdened by wealth a way
has been devised for even water to accommodate luxury.
(5) I shall explain how we reached the point where no flowing
water seemed cold enough for us. As long as the stomach is healthy,
can take wholesome food, and is filled, not stuffed, it is satisfied71
On Clouds, Rain, Hail, Snow
with natural palliatives. When it is burnt by daily indigestion and
feels not the heat of the weather but its own heat, when continual
drunkenness has established itself in the inner organs and is scalding
the digestive system with the bile that it forms, inevitably something
is sought to mitigate that feverishness, which is just intensified by
water. The remedies only exacerbate the illness; and so, not just in
summer, but in the middle of winter too, for the same reason, they
drink snow. (6) What is the reason for this if not diseased intestines
and digestive systems ruined by overindulgence? They are never given
any pause for rest: after dinners lasting till dawn, lunches are stuffed
in, and when they are bloated with the quantity and variety of the
courses, partying sends them into deeper decline. Then the unre-
mitting self-indulgence, which has already overcooked their minds,
drives what is left of them into a state of frenzy and inflames them
with longing for something ever colder. (7) So, although they insu-
late the dining room with curtains and windowpanes, and tame the
winter with plenty of fires, nevertheless that stomach, weakened and
enfeebled by its own heat, seeks something to revive it. For just as
we sprinkle cold water on people who have fainted or are in a daze,
so that they may recover their senses, so their internal organs, dulled
by their vices, can feel nothing unless you shock them with extreme
cold. (8) That is why, I tell you, they are not satisfied even with snow,
but they seek out ice, as though, being solid, its coldness were more
reliable, and they constantly pour on water to melt it. The ice is not
taken from the surface, but, in order that it may have greater power
and more enduring coldness, it is dug out from deep down. So there
is not even a standard charge, but water has its traders and (the
shame of it!) a scale of prices. (9) The Lacedaemonians banished
perfume-sellers from their city and ordered them to leave their ter-
ritory quickly because they were wasting olive oil. What would they
have done if they had seen workshops for storing snow, and all those
pack animals employed to transport water, whose color and taste they
taint with the chaff with which they protect it?
(10) But, good gods, how easy it is to quench a healthy thirst! Yet
what feeling can those throats have when they are deadened and cal-
lused by burning food? Just as nothing is cold enough for them, so
nothing is hot enough, but they gulp down blazing hot mushrooms,
hastily dipped in their seasoning, and virtually smoldering, only tobook four B
72
extinguish them with snow-cooled drinks. You will see, I tell you,
some skinny creatures, wrapped in a Greek tunic and scarf, pale and
ill, not just sipping snow but actually eating it, and dropping lumps of
it into their cups to prevent them growing warm in the gaps between
drinking. (11) Do you think this is thirst? It is a fever, all the more
severe for not being detected by feeling the pulse or by heat spreading
over the skin; but luxury, an unconquerable evil that develops from
soft and pliant to hard and enduring, overcooks the heart itself. Do
you not realize that everything loses its force with familiarity? So
that snow of yours, in which all of you actually swim now, has come,
through regular use and the daily slavery of the stomach, to occupy
the place of water. Look for something even chillier than snow, be-
cause coldness, once you have got used to it, is worth nothing!