Book 1 [originally Book 7 ]
136
<On . . . Fires>
(Praef. 1) In my opinion, Lucilius, excellent man, the difference be-
tween philosophy and other areas of study is as great as the difference,
within philosophy itself, between the branch concerned with humans
and the one concerned with the gods.1 The latter is more elevated and
more noble; it allows itself immense scope; it is not satisfied with the
eyes; it suspects that there is something greater and more beautiful
that nature has placed beyond its sight. (2) In brief, the difference
between the two is as great as the difference between god and human
beings: the one branch teaches what should be done on earth; the
other what is done in the heavens; the one dispels our wrongdoings
and brings a light up close to us so that the uncertainties of life can
be clearly discerned; the other rises far above the darkness in which
we stumble around, whisks us away from the shadows, and leads us
to the source of light.
(3) I myself give thanks to nature whenever I see her not in her
public aspect, but when I have entered her more remote regions,
when I am learning what the material of the universe is, who is its
creator or guardian, what god is, whether he is totally focused on
himself or sometimes takes notice of us too,2 whether he creates
something every day or has created once and for all, whether he is
part of the world or the world itself, whether even today he may
make decisions and amend part of the law of fate, or whether it
would be an impairment of his greatness and an admission of error
to have made something that needed alteration. But the same course
must necessarily seem right to him to whom only the best course
can seem right, nor does that make him less free or powerful; for
he himself is his own necessity.3 (4) If I were not allowed access
to these questions, it would not have been worth being born. For
what could give me a reason to be glad that I had been included
in the ranks of the living? Digesting food and drink? Stuffing full
this body—which is vulnerable, delicate, and will perish if it is not
constantly replenished—and living as nurse to a sick man? Fearing137
On . . . Fires
death, the one thing to which we are born? Take away this invaluable
blessing,4 and life is not worth the sweat and the panic.
(5) What a despicable thing a human being is if he does not rise
above human affairs! All the time that we are struggling with our
passions, what is so wonderful about our achievement, even if we pre-
vail? We are outdoing monsters: why should we be conceited because
we are not as bad as the worst people? I cannot see why anyone who
is more robust than the others in a hospital should be pleased with
himself: (6) strength is quite different from good health. Have you
broken free from moral vices? Your face does not have a feigned ex-
pression, your speech is not designed to please somebody else, nor are
your feelings concealed, nor do you harbor greed, which denies itself
what it has taken from others, nor luxury, which squanders money
shamefully only to recoup it even more shamefully, nor ambition,
which will bring you honors only by dishonorable means? You have
not yet achieved anything: you have broken free from many things,
but not yet from yourself.
The virtue to which we aspire is marvelous not because freedom
from evil is in itself wonderful, but because it releases the mind, pre-
pares it for knowledge of the celestial, and makes it worthy to enter
into partnership with god. (7) It has consummated and fulfilled the
blessings of human destiny only when it has trampled over every evil
and has sought the heights and entered the inner recesses of nature.
Then, as it wanders among the stars themselves, it takes delight in
laughing at the paved floors of the wealthy and at the whole earth
with its gold—I refer not just to what it has disgorged and given to
the mint for stamping into coinage, but also to what it keeps hidden
for the greed of posterity. (8) The mind cannot despise colonnades,
and ceilings gleaming with ivory, and topiary forests and rivers chan-
neled into houses until it has toured the entire world and until, look-
ing down from on high at the earth—tiny, predominantly covered by
sea, and, even when it rises above it, mainly uncultivated, and either
burnt or frozen—it has said to itself, “This is that pinprick5 that is
carved up among so many nations by sword and fire!”
(9) How ridiculous are mortals’ boundaries! The Dacians must not
pass beyond the lower Danube; let the Thracians enclose their empire
with the Haemus mountain, the Euphrates block the Parthians, thebook one
138
Danube form the boundary between Sarmatian and Roman terri-
tory, the Rhine set a limit on Germany, the Pyrenees raise their ridge
between the Gallic and Spanish provinces, uncultivated desert sands
lie between Egypt and the Ethiopians.6 (10) If someone gave human
intelligence to ants, will they too not divide a single threshing-floor
into many provinces? Once you have ascended to those truly great re-
gions, whenever you see armies marching with standards raised, and,
as though something great were happening, cavalry now protecting
the rear, now exploring ahead, now spread out on the flanks, you will
want to say, “The black column marches across the plain.” 7 It is a
mere scurrying of ants toiling in narrow confines. What difference is
there between them and you apart from the size of your puny bodies?
(11) It is a mere pinprick on which you sail, on which you wage war,
on which you lay out your kingdoms, minute even when the ocean
breaks on either side of them.8
Up above there are vast spaces, which the mind is allowed to enter
and occupy, provided that it takes scarcely anything of the body with
it, that it wipes away any uncleanness, and that it soars upward un-
encumbered, nimble, and self-reliant. (12) When it has reached those
regions, it finds nourishment, it grows, and, as though freed from its
chains, it returns to its origin. It has this proof of its own divinity,
that it takes delight in the divine and enjoys it not as someone else’s
possession but as its own. For confidently it watches the settings and
risings of the stars, and their differing but harmonious paths; it ob-
serves where each star first reveals its light to earth, where its zenith
[the highest part of its course] is, to what point it descends.9 As a fas-
cinated spectator, it examines and inquires into each detail. (13) And
why should it not inquire? It knows this all relates to itself.
It then despises the limitations of its previous dwelling. For what
distance lies between the farthest coasts of Spain and the Indies? An
interval of very few days, if a ship is driven by a favorable wind.10 But
that celestial region affords a journey lasting thirty years to a very
swift star that never halts but is uniformly swift.11 There the mind
at last learns what it has long been inquiring into; there it begins to
know god. What is god? The intelligence of the universe. What is
god? All that you see and all that you do not see. Only then is his true
greatness recognized—greatness than which nothing greater can be139
On . . . Fires
imagined—if he alone is everything, if he controls his creation both
from within and from without.12
(14) So what is the difference between god’s nature and our own?
The mind is the superior part of us; in him there is nothing apart
from mind. He is nothing but reason, although such great error grips
the mortal sphere that human beings think that the most beautiful,
the most organized, the most reliable thing that exists is subject to
accident,13 at the mercy of chance, and therefore disorderly, with all
the lightning-bolts, clouds, storms, and other things that batter the
earth and the neighborhood of the earth. (15) And this foolishness is
not confined to the uneducated, but it also affects those who profess
wisdom.14 There are people who think that they themselves have a
mind, one that has foresight, administering in detail both its own and
other people’s affairs, but that this universe, in which we too find our-
selves, is carried along without any plan by some haphazard process
or by a nature that does not know what it is doing. (16) What value
do you place on learning about these topics and determining the
limits of everything? on learning how great god’s power is; whether
he forms matter for himself or employs matter that is provided for
him; which is prior to the other—whether reason is secondary to
matter or matter to reason; whether god achieves whatever he wants,
or the material he must deal with lets him down in many cases, just as
many things are formed badly even by a great craftsman, not because
his skill is defective, but because the stuff he works with is often
unresponsive to his skill? (17) To look into all this, to learn about it,
to brood over it—is that not to transcend one’s mortality and be re-
registered with a higher status? “What use will that be to you?” you
say. If nothing else, at least this: I shall know that everything is puny
when I have measured god.
(1.1) Now, to proceed to my intended subject, hear what I think
about the fires that the air drives across the sky.15 That they are emit-
ted by a great force is proved by the slanting direction of their motion
and by their extreme rapidity; it is clear that they do not move but
are hurled. The fires have many different shapes. (2) Aristotle calls
one kind a goat.16 If you ask me why, you must first explain to me
why the Kids are so called.17 But if, as is most beneficial, we can agree
not to ask each other questions we know the other cannot answer, itbook one
140
will be more satisfactory to investigate the phenomenon itself rather
than to wonder why Aristotle called a ball of fire a goat. For such
was the shape of the one that appeared, as large as the moon, when
Paulus was waging war against Perseus.18 (3) We also, more than once,
have seen a flame in the shape of a huge ball, which was dispersed
while in flight: we saw such a prodigy at the time of the departure
of the deified Augustus;19 we saw one at the time when Sejanus was
dealt with;20 and Germanicus’s death was accompanied by a sign of
that sort.21 (4) You will say to me, “So are you misguided enough to
think that the gods send signs predicting people’s deaths, and that
anything on earth is important enough for the world to be aware
that it is perishing?” There will be another opportunity to discuss
this question: we shall see whether everything follows a fixed order,
and things are all interconnected, so that what precedes is either a
cause or a sign of what follows; we shall see whether the gods take an
interest in human affairs or the sequence of events itself gives clear
signs indicating what it is going to do.22
(5) For now, I take the view that fires of this kind occur because
the air is subject to violent friction when there is a movement of air
toward another region, and it does not yield, but battles against it-
self. From this disturbance arise beams,23 balls, torches, and fires. But
when it collides more gently and, so to speak, is massaged, smaller
lights are ejected, “and flying stars trail their hair.”24 (6) Then very
tiny fires mark out a slender path and stretch it across the heavens.
So no night is without spectacles of this sort, for it does not take a
major disturbance in the air to produce them. In fact, to put it briefly,
they are produced in the same way as lightning-bolts, but with less
force: just as clouds colliding with moderate force produce lightning-
flashes, and when driven by greater energy produce lightning-bolts,
so when you exert less pressure on the clouds, or they are smaller,
they emit correspondingly weaker lights. (7) Aristotle’s explanation
is as follows: 25 “The earth emits numerous, varied exhalations, some
moist, some dry, some hot, some suited to generating fire.” And it
is not surprising if evaporation from the earth comes in all forms
and is varied, since in the heavens also objects do not appear with a
single color, but the redness of the Dog Star is more intense,26 that of
Mars more subdued, and there is no redness in Jupiter, whose bright-141
On . . . Fires
ness is concentrated in pure light. (8) So, amid the great abundance
of particles that the earth emits and drives into the upper regions,
inevitably some that feed fire reach the clouds and can be set ablaze
not only when they collide, but also when they are exposed to the
sun’s rays. For in our experience as well, wood-shavings sprinkled
with sulphur catch fire across a gap. (9) So it is likely that when such
material is concentrated among the clouds, it can easily be set alight,
and smaller or greater fires are produced according as they have more
or less force. For it is extremely foolish to think that stars either fall
down or leap across the sky, or lose bits through force or friction:
(10) for if that happened, by now there would be none left; for every
single night large numbers appear to move and be transported in dif-
ferent directions. And yet each star can be found in its usual position,
and the size of each remains constant. So it follows that these fires
are generated below the stars and quickly die out because they lack a
foundation and fixed location. (11) “So why do they not shoot across
in daytime too?” What if you were to say that the stars do not exist
in daytime because they are not visible? Just as they are hidden and
occluded by the brightness of the sun, so too torches shoot across
in the daytime as well, but the intensity of the daylight conceals
them. However, if ever such a vast number shoots across that they
can defend their own brightness even against the daylight, then they
are visible. (12) Certainly our generation has more than once seen
daytime torches, some flying from east to west, others from sunset to
sunrise. Sailors think it a sign of a storm when a lot of stars fly across.
But if that is a sign of winds, it occurs where winds come from, that
is in the air, which is in between the moon and the earth.
(13) In a great storm there regularly appear something like stars
resting on a ship’s sail.27 Those in danger then think that they are un-
der the divine protection of Pollux and Castor. However, the grounds
for their optimism are that the storm now appears to be losing its
power, and the winds to be dropping; otherwise the fires would be
moving, not resting. (14) When Gylippus was heading for Syracuse,28
a star was seen to settle above his lance; in Roman camps spears have
appeared to burn, no doubt because fires descended onto them. These
can often strike both animals and trees like lightning-bolts, but if
they possess less energy, they just glide down and settle, and do notbook one
142
strike or wound. Some of them are ejected from between clouds; oth-
ers from a clear sky, if the air was the kind that can emit fire. (15) For
sometimes thunder comes from a clear sky too, for the same reason
as from a cloudy one, because air collides with air: even if it is quite
bright and dry, it can still gather and form bodies similar to clouds,
and they produce a sound when they are struck. So when are beams
formed, when are shields and images of huge fires? When a similar
but more powerful cause acts on such material.
(2.1) Now let us see how the brightness that encircles stars is
formed.29 It is recorded that on the day when the deified Augustus
returned from Apollonia and entered the city,30 a circle of various
colors, such as is usual in the rainbow, was seen around the sun. The
Greeks call this a halo;31 we can most appropriately talk of a garland. I
shall explain how it is said to be formed. (2) When a stone is dropped
into a pool, we see the water spread out in many circles: first a very
small circle is formed, then a wider one, and then other larger ones,
until the movement fades away and dissolves into the smoothness of
motionless water. Let us think of something similar happening in the
air too: when it becomes denser, it can experience a blow; when the
light of the sun or the moon or any star encounters it, it forces it to
recede in expanding circles. For liquid, air, and everything whose form
is altered by an impact is forced into a shape like that of the thing
that exerts force on it. Now all light is round; therefore the air too will
assume that form when struck by light. (3) For this reason the Greeks
have called these bright phenomena “threshing-floors,” because the
places designated for threshing grain are generally round. Now, we
should not think that these things, whether they are threshing-floors
or garlands, are formed close to the stars; for they are a great distance
away from them, even though they appear to encircle and garland
them. These shapes are formed not far from the earth, and our sight,
deceived by its habitual weakness, thinks they are located around the
star itself. (4) But nothing like that can be formed close to the stars
and sun, because in that region there is fine aether. Shapes can be
imprinted only on dense, close-packed bodies, but in fine bodies they
have nowhere to settle or stick. (In the baths too, because of the dark-
ness of the dense air, something like a garland can regularly be seen
around a lamp, most often in a south wind, when the atmosphere is
particularly heavy and dense.) (5) Sometimes they gradually dissolve143
On . . . Fires
and disappear; sometimes they are severed at some point, and sailors
expect a wind from the direction where the garland’s continuity is
disrupted: if it breaks in the north, there will be a north wind; if in
the west, a west wind. This is evidence that these garlands are formed
in the region of the sky in which winds too generally occur; higher
regions do not have garlands because they do not have winds either.
(6) To this evidence add the following as well, that a garland is
never formed except in stable air, when the wind is idle; in other con-
ditions they are generally not seen. For stationary air can be pushed
and pulled and formed into some shape; but light makes no impres-
sion at all on flowing air, for the air does not resist or change shape
because each bit of it is dispersed in turn. (7) So no star will ever
surround itself with such a shape except when the air is dense and
motionless, and therefore receptive to the beam of round light that
hits it. Understandably so—just remember the illustration I gave a
short while ago: a pebble thrown into a pool or lake, or any confined
water, produces countless circles. But it will not do the same in a river.
Why not? Because fast-running water breaks up any pattern. So the
same happens with air: air that stands still can take on a pattern, but
air that is rushing and racing refuses to be controlled and disrupts
every impact and the resulting shape.
(8) When these garlands that I have spoken about have dissolved
evenly and have faded away just where they were, that indicates rest,
peace, and tranquility in the air; when they have given way at one
point, there is a wind from the direction where the break occurs; if
they have been torn at several points, a storm is brewing. (9) The
reason for this can be understood from what I have already explained.
If the entire shape has faded, it is evident that the air is stable and
therefore calm. If it is cut at one point, it is evident that air is bear-
ing down from that side, and so that region will produce a wind.
But when it is lacerated and ripped on all sides, plainly it is being
attacked from numerous points, and unsettled air is assailing it from
all directions. And so from this restlessness in the sky, as it attacks
on so many fronts and struggles on all sides, it is evident that there
will be a storm with numerous winds.
(10) These garlands will mainly be observed at night around the
moon and the other stars, rarely in daytime—so rarely that some of
the Greeks have denied they occur then at all, although historicalbook one
144
records prove them wrong. The reason for the rarity is that the sun’s
light is stronger, and the air itself, when stirred and warmed by the
sun, is more rarefied. The power of the moon is weaker and so is more
easily withstood by the surrounding air. (11) Similarly the other stars
are feeble and cannot break through the air with their own strength,
and so an image of them is formed and preserved in material that is
more solid and less yielding. The air needs to be neither so dense that
it excludes and repels the light that strikes it, nor so thin or rarefied
that it offers no resistance to the incoming rays. This intermediate
state occurs at night, when stars strike the surrounding air with a
gentle light, not aggressively or harshly, and they color the air, which
is denser than it normally is in daytime.
(3.1) On the other hand, rainbows do not occur at night, or only
very rarely, because the moon is not powerful enough to pass through
clouds and tinge them with the kind of color they receive when
struck a glancing blow by the sun. For that is how they32 generate
the form of the multicolored rainbow: because in the clouds some
bits are more swollen, some are lower, and some are too dense to al-
low the sun through, others too feeble to exclude it, this unevenness
creates an alternating sequence of light and shadow, and generates
the amazing variety of colors in the rainbow.
(2) Another explanation is given for the rainbow as follows: when
a pipe bursts at some point, we see water forced out through the tiny
hole; when it is sprayed against the obliquely angled sun, it displays
the form of a rainbow. You will see the same thing happening if you
ever feel like watching a launderer: when he has filled his mouth with
water and lightly sprays the clothes that are spread out on stretching-
frames, you can see various colors produced in the air that is filled
with spray, like the ones that normally shine in a rainbow.
(3) You should be in no doubt that the cause of this phenomenon
lies in moisture; for a rainbow never occurs except in cloudy condi-
tions. But let us examine how it occurs. Certain people say that there
are some raindrops that let the sun’s light through, and others that
are too compacted to transmit light; and so the first sort produce
brightness, the second sort shadow, and hence, by the intermingling
of the two, a rainbow is generated, in which part is bright, welcoming
the sun, and part is darker, excluding it and casting a shadow over
the immediate surroundings.(4) Others reject this account. For it could be thought true if the
rainbow had just two colors, if it consisted of light and shadow; but
as things are,
In it we see a bit of red, a bit of yellow, a bit of blue, and other colors
traced in slender lines, as in a picture; as the poet says, you could
not tell whether the colors are different unless you compare the last
with the first. For the juxtaposition is deceptive: through nature’s
wonderful handiwork, what starts out extremely similar ends up so
extremely different. So what use are two colors, light and shadow,
since an explanation is required for countless colors?
(5) Some people think the rainbow is produced as follows: in a
region where it is already raining, the individual drops of falling rain
are individual mirrors; so they individually emit an image of the sun.
Then many, or rather innumerable, images, descending and plum-
meting, are merged together; so a rainbow is the merging of many
images of the sun. (6) They argue as follows: “On a fine day,” they say,
“put out a thousand bowls:34 they will all have images of the sun. Dis-
tribute drops on individual leaves: each individual drop will have an
image of the sun. On the other hand, a large pool will have no more
than one image. Why? Because every smooth surface that is confined
and surrounded by a boundary is a mirror. So divide up a reservoir of
enormous size by inserting walls: it will have as many images of the
sun as it has pools. Leave it as it is: it will give you only one image.
It makes no difference how tiny the amount of water or the lake is:
as long as it has boundaries, it is a mirror. So those infinitely many
drops that falling rain carries down are so many mirrors and contain
so many likenesses of the sun. To someone facing them and looking
at them, they appear confused, and the spaces between individual
likenesses cannot be made out, for the distance prevents them from
being distinguished. As a result, instead of individual likenesses, one
confused likeness is seen emerging from all of them.”
(7) Aristotle is of the same opinion:35 “From every smooth sur-
face,” he says, “our sight bends back its rays. Nothing is smoother
145
On . . . Fires
though a thousand different colors gleam,
the transition between them deceives our watching eyes:
for always the adjacent one is the same, but the furthest apart
are different.33book one
146
than water and air; therefore our vision returns to us from dense air
also. When our eyesight is dim and weak, it will fail on impact with
any kind of air. So some people suffer from an infirmity that makes
them appear to be walking toward themselves, and they see their
own image everywhere. Why? Because their weak eyesight cannot
even break through the air closest to them, but comes to a halt.
(8) So any sort of air has the same effect on them as dense air has on
other people; for air of whatever sort is strong enough to repel their
feeble vision. Now water is far more effective at sending our vision
back to us because it is denser and cannot be overcome; it slows down
our eyes’ rays and bends them back to where they have come from.
So since there are many drops in rain, there are as many mirrors; but
because they are small, they reproduce the color of the sun without
the shape. Then since the same color is given off in countless drops
falling without a gap, there begins to be the appearance, not of many
separated images, but of one long, continuous image.”
(9) “How,” you ask, “can you tell me that there are many thou-
sands of images where I can see none? And why, though the sun has
only one color, is the color of the images varied?” In order to rebut the
point you have made, and also other points that are no less in need
of rebuttal, I ought to say this: nothing is more deceptive than our
eyesight, not just with things that distance prevents it from examin-
ing minutely, but also with things it sees within easy reach: an oar
has a shallow covering of water, and it gives the appearance of being
broken; fruit is much bigger to someone looking at it through glass;
a very long colonnade merges the intervals between the columns.
(10) Go back to the sun itself: this object, which reasoning proves
to be larger than the whole earth, our eyesight makes so small that
wise men maintained that it was a foot across.36 None of us sees the
motion of the object that we know is fastest of all,37 nor would we
believe it was moving if it were not evident that it had moved. The
world itself glides with feverish speed and brings risings and settings
round again in a moment, but none of us is aware of its motion. So
why are you surprised that our eyes do not distinguish the drops in
rainfall, and that the difference between the tiny images disappears
as we look from a great distance?
(11) Nobody can be in any doubt that the rainbow is an image of
the sun formed in a cloud that is full of moisture and hollow. The147
On . . . Fires
following should make this clear to you: the image is always opposite
the sun, high up or low down depending on whether the sun has
sunk or risen; it moves in the opposite direction, for if the sun is de-
scending, the image is higher, if it is high, the image is lower. Often,
though, such a cloud is alongside the sun and does not produce a
rainbow, because it does not receive the image in a straight line.38
(12) The variety of color occurs for the simple reason that some of
the color comes from the sun, some from the cloud. In this the liquid
now produces blue lines, now green, now purplish, yellow or fiery, and
two colors, subdued and intense, generate this variety. In the same
way too purple cloth does not all emerge the same from the same
purple dye: it makes a difference how long it is steeped for, whether
the dye it absorbs is thicker or more dilute, whether it is immersed
and boiled several times, or dipped just once. (13) So it is not surpris-
ing that, when there are two things, sun and cloud, that is, a body and
a mirror, that the kinds of colors produced are as numerous as the
kinds of intensification and weakening that they can undergo. For
one color comes from fiery light; another from dim, gentler light.
(14) On other topics, research has no clear direction when we have
nothing we can get a grip on, and free-ranging conjecture is required.
In the present case it is clear that the rainbow has two causes, sun and
cloud, because it never occurs in a clear sky, nor in a sky so cloudy
that the sun is hidden. So it certainly derives from the things without
either of which it does not exist.
(4.1) There is a further point, that it is equally obvious that the
image is emitted like a mirror image, because it is never emitted
except on the opposite side, that is, except when the object that ap-
pears is on one side, and the object that displays it is on the other.
Arguments that are not just persuasive but compelling are adduced
by the geometricians, and no one can be left in any doubt that the
rainbow is an image of the sun that is poorly reproduced because of
the faultiness and shape of the mirror.39 Let us for the time being
try other proofs that can be read at ground level.40 (2) Among the
proofs that the rainbow is generated in this way, I put the fact that it
is generated very quickly. For a huge, many-colored object is woven
across the sky in a moment and vanishes just as quickly; but nothing
is given off as quickly as an image from a mirror, for it does not create
something but displays it.book one
148
(3) Artemidorus of Parium even says what kind of cloud is re-
quired to produce such an image for the sun:41 “If you make a concave
mirror,” he says, “that is a segment of a cutaway sphere, then, if you
stand outside its center, anybody standing next to you will appear
upside down and nearer to you than to the mirror. The same thing,”
he says, “happens when we look at a round, concave cloud from the
side, namely, that the sun’s image is detached from the cloud and is
nearer to us and turned more toward us. It gets the fiery color from
the sun, the blue from the cloud, and the other colors are a mixture
of the two.”
(5.1) People argue against this view as follows: “There are two
opinions about mirrors: some people think that representations are
seen in them, that is, forms of our bodies that are emitted from our
bodies and are distinct from them; others say that not images but
the bodies themselves are seen in a mirror, as the eye-beam is twisted
round and bent back upon itself. (2) For the present it makes no
difference how we see what we undoubtedly do see, but, however it
happens, an image that is similar must be given off from the mirror.
But what is as dissimilar as the sun and a rainbow, in which neither
the shape of the sun, nor its color, nor its size, is visible? The rainbow
is far larger, and, where it is bright, it is far redder than the sun; and
in respect of its other colors, it is quite different. (3) Then, when you
require air to have the properties of a mirror, you must show me the
same smooth body, the same evenness, the same brightness. Yet no
clouds bear any resemblance to a mirror: we often pass through the
middle of them, but do not see ourselves in them; those who climb
mountain tops look at clouds, yet do not see their image in them.
(4) “‘Individual drops are individual mirrors.’ I grant that, but
I deny that a cloud is composed of drops. They contain something
from which drops can be formed, not actual drops; a cloud does not
contain water either, but the material for future water. (5) Suppose
we concede both that there are innumerable drops in clouds and
that they give off an image: still they would not all give off a single
image, but individual drops would give individual images. Or again,
join mirrors together: the images will not merge into one, but each
will embrace within itself a likeness of the observed object. There are
some mirrors composed of many tiny mirrors. If you place one person
in front of them, a nation is visible, as each segment generates its149
On . . . Fires
own shape; although the mirrors are joined together and contiguous,
nevertheless they keep their images separate, and from one person
they create a crowd; they do not amalgamate the mob, but keep it
divided up into individual shapes. But the rainbow is bounded by a
single outline, and the whole thing possesses a single shape.
(6) “‘Tell me, now,’ someone says, ‘isn’t there also often some re-
semblance to the colors we see in a rainbow when water is sprayed
from a burst pipe or splashed up by an oar?’ That is true, but not
for the reason that you want to be accepted, that each individual
drop forms an image of the sun. For the drops fall too quickly to be
able to form images; they need to stay still in order to absorb what
they are copying. So what happens? They take on the color, not the
image. In any case, as Nero Caesar says most elegantly, ‘the collar
of the Cytheran’s dove shines when it moves,’42 and the peacock’s
neck gleams with different colors whenever it turns. So are we going
to say that feathers of this sort, whose every movement turns into
new colors, are mirrors? (7) Clouds are no less different in nature
from mirrors than are the birds I have mentioned and chameleons
and certain animals whose color alters. This is caused either by their
own agency, when, inflamed with anger or desire, they change their
skin-color as a fluid spreads beneath the surface; or by the angle of
the light, since their coloring depends on whether it falls on them
vertically or obliquely.
(8) “What similarity is there between mirrors and clouds? For
the former do not transmit light, the latter let light pass through;
the former are dense and compacted, the latter rarefied; the former
are all made of the same material, the latter are random assemblages
of diverse constituents, which makes them unstable and unlikely to
hold together for long. Besides, at sunrise we see part of the sky go
red, we sometimes see clouds of a fiery color; so, just as they receive
this one color from an encounter with the sun, what is to stop them
from absorbing many colors, even though they do not have the prop-
erties of a mirror?
(9) “Just now,” the person says, “you included among your argu-
ments that the rainbow is always brought into existence on the op-
posite side to the sun, because an image is not given off from a mirror
either unless it is directly in front. This point,” he says, “is agreed
between us: for just as the object whose image is to be transferredbook one
150
to the mirror must be placed opposite to it, so, to enable the clouds
to be colored, the sun must be suitably placed for this purpose; for it
does not have the same effect irrespective of what direction it shines
from, and for this purpose the rays need to fall in the appropriate
way.” (10) This is what is said by those who argue for the view that
the cloud becomes colored.
Posidonius and those who think that this kind of phenomenon
is produced by mirror-reflection reply as follows:43 “If there were
any color in the rainbow, it would last and could be viewed more
distinctly the closer one got. As it is, the image of a rainbow is clear
from a distance, but disappears when one gets up close.” (11) I do
not agree with this objection, although I approve of the theory itself.
Why? I shall tell you: because the cloud is indeed colored, but in such
a way that its color is not visible from all sides. For the cloud itself is
not visible from all sides either; for no one who is inside a cloud can
see it. So why is it surprising if its color cannot be seen by someone
by whom the cloud itself cannot be viewed? Yet the cloud, although
it cannot be seen, does exist; so the same goes for its color. So it is
not an argument for the color not being real that it stops being visible
as people approach it. For the same thing happens with the clouds
themselves, and they are not unreal because they cannot be seen.
(12) Besides, when you are told that the cloud is dyed by the sun,
you are not being told that the color has been imprinted as if on a
hard, stable, enduring body, but as on a fluid, changeable one, which
allows no more than a short-lived display. Also, there are some colors
that reveal their intensity at a distance: the better the quality of Tyr-
ian purple cloth and the more deeply dyed it is, the higher you need
to hold it up so that it can display its bright color. But one cannot
infer that it does not possess the color—it does possess an excellent
one—simply because it does not reveal it irrespective of how it is
spread out.
(13) I am of the same opinion as Posidonius and consider that a
rainbow is formed in a cloud shaped like a concave, round mirror,
in the shape of a section of a sphere. This cannot be proved without
the help of geometricians, who use arguments that leave no room
for doubt to demonstrate that it is a copy of the sun, but not a close
resemblance. (14) For not all mirrors stick to the truth: there are some151
On . . . Fires
you would be afraid to look at (they give such a deformed image,
distorting the appearance of the people looking into them, maintain-
ing a resemblance, but a corrupt one); there are some where you feel
pleased with your strength when you look in them (the biceps grow
so big, and the whole body’s physique is increased to superhuman
size); there are some that show the right hand side, some the left,
some that distort and invert. So why is it surprising that in a cloud
too there should be a mirror of a kind that gives off a defective like-
ness of the sun?
(6.1) Further arguments include this one also, that a rainbow is
never larger than a semicircle, and that the higher the sun, the smaller
it is.
As our Virgil says, “and the huge rainbow drinks” when rain is
approaching.44 But its threats vary depending on what side it appears
from: if it rises in the south, it will bring a large quantity of rainwater
(for the clouds could not be overwhelmed by the very strong sunlight,
so powerful are they); if it shines somewhere in the west, there will
be dew and light rain; if it rises due east or thereabouts, it promises
clear skies.45
(2) “Yet why, if the rainbow is an image of the sun, does it ap-
pear much bigger than the sun itself ?” Because one kind of mirror
has the property of displaying what it sees on a much bigger scale
and enlarging shapes to a monstrous size; conversely, another kind
diminishes them. (3) Tell me this: why does the image form a circle
unless it is a reflection of a circle? Maybe you will explain where it
gets its variegated color from, but you will not explain where it gets
such a shape unless you point to some model on which it is based.
There is no model except the sun; since you too admit that it gets its
color from the sun, it follows that it gets its shape from there too.
And then you and I agree that those colors that paint the whole sky
come from the sun, but we disagree on this one point: you say that
the color is real; I say it is apparent. Whether it is real or apparent, it
comes from the sun. You will not account for the <sudden appear-
ance and> sudden cessation of that color, since intense brightness
always <both forms gradually> and disperses gradually. (4) Its rapid
appearance and rapid demise is in my favor. For this is a peculiarity
of the mirror, that what appears in it is not assembled bit by bit, butbook one
152
comes into existence instantly in its entirety. Every image in a mirror
vanishes just as quickly as it is put together; for to produce or remove
them, nothing is required apart from their being displayed and being
withdrawn. So in that cloud there is no real material and no body,
but an illusion and a resemblance without substance. You want to be
sure that this is so? The rainbow will cease if you cover over the sun.
Put a second cloud in front of the sun, I tell you, and the rainbow’s
colorfulness will disappear.
(5) “But the rainbow is considerably larger than the sun.” I said
a moment ago that mirrors are made that magnify every body they
copy. I shall add that everything is much larger when one is looking
through water: writing, however tiny and difficult, is seen larger and
clearer through a glass sphere full of water; fruit appears more beau-
tiful than it is if it is swimming in a glass bowl; the stars themselves
seem larger when one looks at them through a cloud, because our
eyesight falters in moisture and cannot reliably grasp what it wants
to. This is plain if you fill a cup with water and drop a ring in it: for
although the ring is lying on the bottom, its image is emitted on the
surface of the water. (6) Anything seen through moisture is much
larger than in reality. Why is it surprising that an enlarged image of
the sun is emitted when it is seen in a moist cloud, since there are two
causes of the phenomenon? Because in the cloud there is something
resembling glass which can transmit light, and there is also some
water—or even if it does not yet contain water, it is forming water,
that is, it has already virtually reached the state that it is changing
into from its current state.
(7.1) “Since you have mentioned glass,” someone says, “I shall use
it as the basis for an argument against you. A small rod, grooved, or
angular and knobbly like a club, is commonly made out of glass; if
sunlight strikes this obliquely, it emits the kind of color seen in a
rainbow, so that you can tell this is not an image of the sun but a
change of color produced by deflection.” (2) First of all, many aspects
of this argument are in my favor: it is clear that the phenomenon is
produced by the sun; it is clear that there must be something smooth,
like a mirror, to deflect the sun; then it is clear that no color is created,
but only the semblance of a counterfeit color, such as a dove’s neck
first assumes, then discards, as I said,46 depending on how it is angled.
This also occurs in a mirror, in which no color is implanted, but only153
On . . . Fires
a representation of something else’s color. (3) I have to explain just
one thing: that the sun’s image cannot be seen in that kind of glass
rod. But it is incapable of reproducing the image properly; it does
try to give off an image, because its material is smooth and suitable
for the purpose, but it cannot do so, because its shape is irregular.
If it were manufactured in the right way, it would give off as many
suns as it had knobbles. Since these are distinct from each other but
are not broad enough to function as mirrors, they produce only an
attempt at an image, not the real thing, and because they are so close
together, they blur the images and create the impression of a single
color.
(8.1) “But why does a rainbow not form a complete circle, but
only a semicircle is seen, even when it is at its fullest extent and cur-
vature?” Some people take the following view: “Since the sun is much
higher than the clouds, it strikes them only from above; consequently
their lower part is not colored by the light. So since the sun’s light
falls on one part of them, they copy one part of it, and that is never
more than half.” (2) This argument is not very strong. Why? Because,
although the sun is above, it nevertheless strikes the whole cloud and
so colors the whole. And why not, since it often makes its rays pass
through a cloud and forces its way through all its denseness? Then
they are saying something that contradicts their own position. For
if the sun is higher and so shines only on the higher parts of clouds,
the rainbow will never reach down to the earth; yet it does come
right down to the ground. (3) Besides, the rainbow is invariably op-
posite to the sun; it makes no difference whether it is above or below,
because the whole side facing the sun is struck by the light. Next,
sometimes the sun produces a rainbow even when it is setting: then
at least it strikes the cloud from below, being close to the earth. Yet
even then there is a semicircle, although the sunlight is reaching the
clouds from a low position and a murky one.
(4) Our people, who claim that light is emitted in a cloud just as
in a mirror, make the cloud concave, a section of a sphere; and this
cannot give off an entire circle because it itself is only part of a circle.
I support their theory, but I do not agree with this argument. For if
a concave mirror can produce a complete image of a circle placed in
front of it, there is nothing to stop a complete sphere being seen in
a hemispherical mirror.book one
154
(5) We have also said that circles similar to a rainbow appear
round the sun and moon.47 Why is that circle complete, but it never
is in a rainbow? Again, why is it always concave clouds that absorb
the sunlight, never flat or bulging ones?
(6) Aristotle says that after the autumnal equinox a rainbow can
form at any time of day,48 but in summer it can form only when the
day is either beginning or drawing to a close. The explanation for
this is obvious: first, because in the middle part of the day the sun
is very hot and overwhelms the clouds, and cannot receive its image
back from clouds that it is breaking up; but in the early morning or
when sinking toward sunset, it has less power, and so the clouds can
withstand it and send it back. (7) Again, the sun does not usually
form a rainbow except when opposite to the clouds in which it forms
it; therefore, when the days are shorter, it is always at a low angle,
and so at any point in the day, even when at its highest, it finds some
clouds that it can strike from the opposite side of the sky. But in
summertime it travels above our heads; and so in the middle of the
day it is extremely high up and looks down on earth at too vertical
an angle for an encounter with any clouds to be possible; for it then
has them all beneath itself.
(9.1) The next topic for discussion is rods,49 which are no less
colorful and variegated, and which we are equally used to treating
as signs of rain. There is no need to expend much effort on them,
because rods are nothing but incomplete rainbows. For their appear-
ance is colored, but not curved: they lie in a straight line. (2) They
are formed next to the sun, generally in a cloud that is moist and
already forming raindrops. So in them there is the same coloring as
in a rainbow; only the shape is altered, because the clouds in which
they are stretched out also have a different shape.
(10) There is similar variety of color in garlands,50 but the dif-
ference is that garlands occur everywhere, wherever there is a star,
whereas rainbows occur only facing the sun, and rods only in the
vicinity of the sun. I can also express the difference between them all
as follows: if you divide up a garland, the result will be a rainbow, if
you straighten it out, it will be a rod. They all have complex coloring,
with various combinations of blue and yellow. Rods are found only
next to the sun; rainbows are solar and lunar; garlands are found with
all the stars. (11.1) Another kind of rod appears when rays of light,And by what name shall I tell of you,
Rhaetian wine? But do not on that account compete with
Falernian cellars.52
(3) So nothing prevents them from being called parhelia. They are
images of the sun in a cloud that is nearby and dense like a mirror.
Some people define a parhelion as follows: a round, bright cloud that
resembles the sun. For it follows the sun and is never further away
than it was when it appeared. Is any of us surprised at seeing a copy
of the sun in some spring or still lake? I think not. Yet an image of
it can be given off up in the sky just as well as at our level, so long as
there is material suitable for doing so.
(12.1) Whenever we want to detect an eclipse of the sun, we set
out bowls, which we fill with either olive oil or pitch, because a dense
liquid is less easily disturbed and so preserves the images it receives.
Images cannot be seen except in something clear and motionless.
Then we regularly observe how the moon gets in front of the sun; by
interposing its body, it eclipses the sun (though the sun is so much
bigger), sometimes partially, if it happens to overlap the edge of the
sun, or sometimes completely. This is called a total eclipse; it makes
the stars visible too and interrupts the daylight. Obviously this occurs
when both spheres are in alignment with the earth. (2) So just as an
image of each of them can be seen on earth, so it can in the air, when
the air is of such a compacted and clear consistency that it receives
a likeness of the sun. Other clouds receive one too, but they let it
pass by if they are either moving, or rarefied, or dirty: moving clouds
scatter the likeness; rarefied ones let it pass through; dirty, impure
155
On . . . Fires
slender, intense, and distinct from each other, are projected through
narrow apertures in the clouds; they too are signs of rain.
(2) At this point how am I to conduct myself ? What should I
call them? Images of the sun? Historians call them suns and record
that two or three have appeared at once. The Greeks call them par-
helia, because they are seen quite close to the sun, or because they
tend toward some resemblance to the sun.51 For they do not imitate
it completely, just its size and shape. Also they have no heat, being
feeble and weak. What name are we to give them? Do I do what
Virgil does? He hesitated over a name, then used what he had hesi-
tated over:book one
156
ones are not aware of it, just as in our experience tarnished surfaces
do not give off images.
(13.1) Two or more parhelia sometimes occur at once, and the
explanation is the same. For what is to prevent there being as many of
them as there are clouds capable of displaying a likeness of the sun?
Some people take the following view: whenever two such representa-
tions arise, they think that one of them is an image of the sun, the
other an image of the image. For in our experience also, when several
mirrors are arranged so that one has sight of another, they are all filled
with images, and one image comes from the real thing, but the rest
are copies of images. It does not matter what it is that is displayed to
a mirror: whatever it sees, it sends back. So, high up in the sky as well,
if by some chance clouds are arranged so that they have sight of each
other, one cloud sends back an image of the sun, the other an image
of the image. (2) The clouds that produce this effect need to be dense,
smooth, bright, flat, *** the sun.53 Therefore all representations of this
sort are bright and resemble discs of the moon, because they shine as
a result of reflection, receiving the sunlight at an oblique angle: for if
the cloud is below the sun and too near, it is dispersed by it; but if it
is far away, it will not send back its rays or produce an image. For in
our experience too, mirrors do not give off images of us when they
are a long way removed from us, because our eyesight is unable to
return all the way back to us. (3) These suns (I shall use the historians’
terminology)54 are also indicators of rain showers, especially if they
form in the region of the south wind, the source of particularly dense
clouds. When the sun is flanked on either side by such an image, if
we believe Aratus,55 a storm is brewing.
(14.1) It is time to run through other kinds of fire as well. They
have various shapes: sometimes a star shoots across; sometimes there
are conflagrations, at times fixed and steady, at times unstable. Many
types of these can be seen: there are “wells,” when there is a surround-
ing garland, as it were, and inside there is a huge recess in the sky,
looking as though a circular cave has been dug out; there are “jars,”
when a huge, round mass of fire, resembling a large pot, either moves
along or burns in one spot; there are “chasms,” when a stretch of the
sky has receded and, as it were, gapes open, displaying flames deep
down. (2) These all come in many colors: some are a very intense red;157
On . . . Fires
some have a weak, pale flame; some have a bright light; some pulsate;
some are a uniform yellow with no discharges or rays emerging.56
So we see “long tracks of flames gleaming in their wake.” 57
(3) These quasi-stars appear suddenly and fly past, and seem to leave a
long trail of fire because of their immense rapidity, since our eyesight
cannot discern their movement across the sky but thinks that the
whole path they have traversed is made of fire. So great is the speed
of their movement that its stages cannot be distinguished; only its
sum total can be grasped: we realize where the star has gone rather
than where it is going. (4) So it marks out its entire course as if with
a continuous fire, because the slowness of our sight cannot keep up
with its movements as it flies but sees simultaneously both where it
suddenly appeared from and where it has finally got to. The same
happens with lightning-bolts: their fire seems extended to us because
it traverses its course swiftly, and the whole of its downward path
impinges on our eyes at once. But the fire does not have a body that
extends across the whole of its course, for objects as long and thin as
that cannot have a powerful impact.
(5) So how do they suddenly emerge? A fire is set alight by fric-
tion in the air and propelled rapidly by wind. Yet it is not always
caused by wind or friction: sometimes it also starts because the air
is in a suitable condition. For up above there is a lot of dry, hot,
earthy matter, in which fire breaks out and descends, following its
fuel; and so it is swept along rapidly. (6) “But why is the color varied?”
Because it depends on the nature of what is set on fire and on the
size and power of the force by which it is set on fire. Moving objects
of this sort indicate wind coming from the region from where they
emerge.
(15.1) “How,” you ask, “do the bright objects that the Greeks call
sela occur?”58 In many ways, so they say: powerful winds can produce
them; so can the heat of the upper sky (for since fire is distributed so
widely, it sometimes ignites things lower down, if they are inflam-
mable); the movement of the stars can cause a fire with its swift prog-
ress and transmit it to lower regions. And besides, can it not happen
that the air forces a powerful fire up as far as the aether, producing
a bright object, or a conflagration, or the emergence of something
like a star? (2) Of these bright objects, some travel headlong likebook one
158
shooting stars; some remain in a particular place, giving off enough
light to banish darkness and restore daylight until their fuel is used
up. Then first they become fainter; next, like a flame collapsing on
itself, by steady contraction they are reduced to nothing. Some of
them appear within clouds; some above the clouds, when dense air,
after it has long fed fire closer to the ground, forces it up as far as
the stars. (3) Some of these do not tolerate delay but race past or else
are immediately extinguished where they blazed up. These are called
bright objects, because their appearance is brief and short-lived. But
their descent is not harmless; for they have often caused damage
like lightning-bolts. Things touched by them we call <star-struck>,
which the Greeks call asteroplêcta. (4) But when they last longer,
and their fire is stronger, and they follow the motion of the heaven,
and even keep to their own paths, our people think they are comets,
which have been discussed.59 There are different types, “bearded,” “cy-
presses,” “torches,” and all the others whose fire is dispersed behind
them. It is uncertain whether one should include here “beams” and
“jars,” which are rarely seen; for they need a great concentration of
fire, since their huge circumference is considerably greater than the
size of the early morning sun. (5) You may include here something
we frequently read about in historical works, that the sky appeared
to burn; sometimes the burning is so high up that it seems to be
among the stars; sometimes so low down that it looks as though
something is on fire in the distance. In the reign of Tiberius Caesar,
cohorts rushed to the assistance of the colony at Ostia as though it
was on fire when there had been burning in the sky for much of the
night—not very bright, but with a dense, smoky fire.
(6) No one doubts that these phenomena contain the flame that
they display: they have a definite reality. But regarding the phenom-
ena discussed earlier (I mean the rainbow and garlands), there is a
question whether they deceive our eyes and consist of an illusion, or
in them too what is seen is real. (7) We do not agree that underlying
the rainbow or garland there is any definite body, but we consider
that here we have the deceptiveness of a mirror, which simply creates
the illusion of a separate body. For what is shown in a mirror does
not exist; otherwise it would not disappear or be instantly overlain by
another image, nor would countless shapes vanish one moment and
be captured the next. (8) So what are they? They are semblances, an159
On . . . Fires
empty imitation of real bodies that themselves are corruptly distorted
by things so constituted as to have that effect. For, as I have said,60
there are mirrors that deform the appearance of those who look at
them, and there are some that enlarge them immeasurably, so that
they exceed human stature and the scale of our bodies.
(16.1) At this point I want to tell you a story, so that you may
learn how lust does not disdain any means of stimulating pleasure
and applies its ingenuity to encouraging its own madness. There was
a certain Hostius Quadra who turned his obscenity into a dramatic
spectacle. The deified Augustus judged that this rich, miserly man,
a slave to his own hundred millions, did not deserve to be avenged
after he had been killed by his slaves; he virtually declared that he
had been lawfully executed. His impurity was not confined to one
sex, but he lusted after men as well as women. He made mirrors of
the type I have just described, giving off greatly magnified images,
in which a finger appeared longer and thicker than an arm. He ar-
ranged them so that, when he was submitting to a man with his
back to him, he could see his partner’s every movement in a mirror;
and then he delighted in the illusory size of his member as though
it were real. (3) He used to go recruiting in all the bath-houses and
selected men after openly sizing them up; but all the same he used
to thrill his insatiable vice with deceptions as well. Go on then, tell
us that mirrors were discovered so that we could look presentable!
It is disgusting to speak of what that monster, who ought to have
been torn to pieces by his own mouth,61 said and did when mirrors
were placed all around him, so that he could be a spectator of his
own enormities and could fill not just his mouth but his eyes with
things that burden the conscience even when kept secret, things that
anyone would deny having perpetrated even to himself. (4) Yet, by
Hercules, wickedness does shrink from the sight of itself. Even in
depraved people who are exposed to every kind of shame, there is a
sensitive modesty when it comes to the eyes. But that man, as though
it were not enough to submit to unheard of, unknown things, invited
his eyes to watch; not content with a direct view of the extent of his
wrongdoing, he surrounded himself with mirrors in which he could
distribute and exhibit his shocking acts; and because he could not
watch so attentively when he had lowered his head and fastened onto
someone else’s groin, he displayed his efforts to himself in images.book one
160
(5) He watched the lust of his own mouth; he watched the men whom
he admitted at all points simultaneously; sometimes he shared him-
self out between a male and females, and as he passively submitted
his whole body to them, he watched those unspeakable acts. What
on earth did that impure man leave to do in the dark? He was not
afraid of the daylight, but he exhibited to himself, he commended to
himself, those monstrous couplings. Would you not expect that he
even wanted to have his picture painted in the act?
(6) Even prostitutes have a certain modesty, and those bodies
that are exposed to public derision cover themselves with something
to hide their tragic submissiveness. So in some ways even brothels
are decorous. But that monster had turned his own obscenity into
a spectacle, and he exhibited to himself things that no night is dark
enough to hide. (7) “I submit,” he said, “to a man and a woman at the
same time. Nevertheless even with the part of me that is so far redun-
dant I act the man for someone’s humiliation. All my members are
occupied in acts of debauchery: let my eyes have a share in my lust as
well and be its witnesses and inspectors. Even the things that are kept
out of sight by the structure of our bodies should be made visible by
technology, so that no one can think I do not know what I am doing.
(8) Nature wasted her time, being so mean with the assistance she
gave to human lust and organizing the coupling of other animals bet-
ter. I shall find a way of both deceiving and satisfying my obsession.
What use is my wickedness if my wrongdoing keeps within nature’s
limits? I shall surround myself with the kind of mirror that gives off
incredibly large images. (9) If I could, I would make them real; since
I cannot, I shall feed on the illusion. Let my obscenity see more than
it is capable of; let it be astonished at the things it submits to.” What
an outrage! He was perhaps killed too quickly, before he could see it:
he ought to have been sacrificed in front of his own mirror!
(17.1) Now let people mock philosophers because they discuss the
nature of mirrors, because they ask why our appearance is sent back
to us, why it faces toward us, what nature was thinking of when, after
producing real bodies, she also wanted likenesses of them to be seen,
(2) what was the point of producing this material capable of receiving
images. It was not, surely, so that we could pluck our beards in front
of a mirror, or so that we men could make our faces smooth: she has
never in any way served the interests of luxury. No, first of all, because161
On . . . Fires
our eyes were too feeble to tolerate looking straight at the sun and
would not have known its shape, she displayed it with a weakened
light. For although one may study the sun when it is rising and set-
ting, still, we would not know about its true appearance when it is
shining with white light and not red unless it appeared to us more
gently, and easier to look at, in some liquid. (3) Besides, we would
not see the encounter of two heavenly bodies that regularly interrupts
the daylight, and we could not know what it was that withheld the
sunlight though no cloud was in the way, unless we saw the images
of the sun and moon more readily on the ground. (4) Mirrors were
invented so that human beings might know themselves, and this
leads to many benefits—first of all self-knowledge, then guidance
for particular circumstances: for the handsome person, to avoid dis-
honor; for the ugly person, to realize that virtue must compensate
for bodily imperfections; for the young man, to be reminded by his
youthful beauty that this is the time for learning and for courageous
enterprises; for the old man, to put aside what is inappropriate for
gray hairs and to reflect on death. These are the reasons that nature
gave us the opportunity to see ourselves.
(5) A clear spring or a smooth rock offered each person a reflec-
tion: “Recently I saw myself down on the shore, when the sea stood
unmoved by the winds.” 62 What do you think was the lifestyle of
people who arranged their hair in front of this kind of mirror? That
more innocent age, which was content with what came to hand, did
not yet distort benefits into vices and did not appropriate nature’s
discoveries for the sake of lust and luxury. (6) First of all, chance
revealed each person’s appearance to them; then when the self-love
that is innate in mortals made the sight of their own appearance
pleasurable, they looked down more often at the things in which they
had seen their reflection. After a degenerate people went below the
earth itself to dig up what should have been buried, iron was used
first (and humans would have come to no harm when they unearthed
it if they had unearthed it alone); then afterward they used other evils
from the earth.63 People noticed their reflections on their smooth
surfaces when they were busy with something else—one person saw
it in a cup, another in a bronze vessel made for other uses, and soon
discs were made for this very purpose, not yet from gleaming silver,
but from fragile,64 cheap material.book one
162
(7) The men of old lived unrefined lives and were smart enough if
they used a river current to wash away the dirt accumulated during
their work. Even in those days they took care to arrange their hair
and comb their protruding beards, but they all did this for them-
selves, not for each other. Even wives never handled their husbands’
hair, which back then men were in the habit of growing long; they
looked handsome without any help from experts and tossed their
hair just as noble animals toss their manes. (8) Later, as luxury gained
control, mirrors as big as the whole body were made from engraved
gold and silver, and later on they were decorated with jewels. One
of these cost a woman more than the value of the dowries of her
ancient counterparts, including the dowries given at public expense
to the children of impoverished generals. Do you think that Scipio’s
daughters possessed a gold-plated mirror, when their dowry was paid
in old copper coinage? (9) O blessed poverty that left room for such
glory! If they had possessed one, they would not have received that
dowry. But whoever it was who had the senate for father-in-law, he
realized that he had received a dowry that it would not be right to
hand back.65 Today the dowry that *** gave *** 66 would not pay for a
single mirror for the young daughters of freedmen. (10) For luxury
has gradually got worse, enticed onward by wealth itself; vice has
increased vastly; and so indiscriminate is recourse to all sorts of treat-
ments that what used to be called female toiletries are now standard
male equipment—for all men, I tell you, even soldiers. Is a mirror
now used just for the sake of our appearance? No, it has become es-
sential for any and every vice.