Book 4 a [originally Book 2 ]
On the Nile
(praef.1) You are delighted with Sicily—so you write, Lucilius, ex-
cellent man—and with the duties of a procuratorship that leaves
you leisure time; and that delight will continue, if you are willing
to keep the duties within their limits and not treat a procuratorship
as a governorship. I have no doubt that you are willing. I know how
disinclined to ambition you are, how at home with leisure and study.
Let those who cannot endure their own company yearn for the bustle
of activity and people; you are on excellent terms with yourself. (2) It
is not surprising that this is granted to few of us: we bully and pester
ourselves;1 sometimes we suffer from self-love, sometimes from self-
loathing; now we inflate our wretched minds with arrogance, now we
swell them with desire, at other times we weary them with pleasure
or consume them with anxiety. The worst of it is that we are never
on our own; so, inevitably, there is constant quarrelling in this great
brotherhood of wrongdoing.
(3) So, my dear Lucilius, do what you habitually do: keep yourself
apart from the crowd, as far as you can, so that you do not expose
your flank to the flatterers.2 When it comes to attacking their supe-
riors, they are professionals. Even if you are really on your guard, you
will not be a match for them. Yet believe me: if you are caught out,
it will be because you betray yourself. (4) Ingratiating behavior has
this characteristic: even when it is rejected, it gives pleasure; often
after being spurned, it is eventually welcomed back. For it claims
credit for the very fact that it is repudiated, and not even abuse can
subdue it. What I am about to say is incredible but true: each person
is most exposed where he is protected.3 (5) So train in the knowledge
that you cannot achieve invulnerability. When you have taken every
precaution, a blow will penetrate your armor. One person will use
flattery secretly, sparingly; another openly, publicly, with pretended
gaucheness, as though it were naïveté, not skill. Plancus,4 who was the
greatest expert before Vitellius,5 used to say that there should be no
concealment or dissembling in flattery. “Blandishments are wasted
if hidden,” he said. (6) When the flatterer is caught, he is making
53Book four a
54
excellent progress, and even better if he is rebuked, if he blushes.
Realize that in your position you will encounter many Plancuses, and
that being unwilling to be praised is no remedy against such dangers.
Passienus Crispus is the most acute person I have known on any and
every subject,6 and especially on distinguishing and describing dif-
ferent kinds of fault. He often used to say that we do not close the
door against flattery but push it to, and do so rather as a door is often
shut against a girlfriend: if she forces it open she endears herself to
us, and even more so if she breaks it down.
(7) I remember Demetrius,7 an excellent man, telling some pow-
erful freedman that he found an easy path to wealth on the day he
repented of his good intentions. “I shall not begrudge any of you this
skill,” he said. “But I shall teach those who need an income how they
do not have to endure the uncertainties of the sea or the lottery of
buying and selling, nor to try out the unreliable world of farming,
or the more unreliable one of politics; I’ll teach how they can make
money not just easily but enjoyably, and can rob victims who relish
it. (8) I shall swear,” he said, “that you are taller than Annaeus Fidus
and Apollonius the boxer, even though you have the physique of a
monkey matched with a Thracian.8 When I say that no one is more
generous than you, I shall not be lying, since you could be regarded
as having given everyone everything you have let them keep.”
(9) That is how it is, my dear Lucilius:9 the more open flattery
is, the more brazen it is, the more it wipes away its own blushes
and causes other people’s, then the swifter its victory. Our madness
has got to the stage where someone who is sparing with flattery is
regarded as mean. (10) I used to tell you about my brother Gallio10—
whom nobody loves sufficiently, not even someone who could not
love him more. He was unacquainted with other faults, but hated this
one. You probed his defenses on every side. You started to express
your admiration for his intellect, superior to anyone else’s and fully
deserving to be treated with reverence rather than with contempt:
he ran away. You started to praise his simple lifestyle, which recoiled
from the spirit of our age without seeming either to share it or to
condemn it: he interrupted after a few words. (11) You started to com-
pliment his friendliness and his unaffected charm, which captivated
people even in passing, a kindness he bestowed freely on people even
in chance encounters (no human being is as dear to any one person55
On the Nile
as he was to everybody, although at the same time—so great is the
power of natural goodness when it has no whiff of artificiality or
pretence—everybody gave himself the credit for the kindness shown
to all): but at this point too he resisted your flattery, so that you ex-
claimed that you had discovered a man who was impregnable against
the ambushes that everyone lets into his heart. (12) You declared that
you admired this wisdom of his, this perseverance in avoiding an
unavoidable evil, and you did this all the more forcefully since you
hoped you would be heard with open ears, even though what you
said was flattering, because what you said was true. But he realized
he must resist all the more; for falsehood always seeks to bolster its
authority with truth. I do not want you to be dissatisfied with your-
self, as though you acted a part badly, and as though he suspected
some lack of seriousness or some trickery. He did not catch you out
but repulsed you.
(13) Model yourself on his example. When some flatterer ap-
proaches you, say, “Please take those words, which now pass from one
magistrate to another accompanied by lictors,11 and present them to
someone who wants to hear whatever you say and is ready to reply
in kind. I neither wish to deceive nor am capable of being deceived.
I should like to be praised by you if you did not also praise bad
people.”
What need is there to descend to the level where they can attack
you from close quarters? Keep a big gap between you. (14) When
you want to be praised properly, why should you be in debt to any-
body else? Praise yourself ! Say, “I devoted myself to liberal studies.
Although poverty urged otherwise and directed my talents toward
instant rewards for study, I turned aside to unremunerative pursuits:
I applied myself to poetry and to the beneficial study of philosophy.
(15) I showed that virtue can find a place in every heart; I escaped
the confines of my birth, measuring myself on the basis not of my
fortune but of my mind; I stood on a par with the greatest. Gaius
did not rob me of my loyalty in my friendship with Gaetulicus, and
Messallina and Narcissus, public enemies for a long time before they
became enemies of each other, could not overturn my resolve in the
case of other people whom I held in ill-fated affection.12 I risked my
neck for loyalty; no word was extracted from me that could not be
uttered with a good conscience. For my friends I was full of fears, forBook four a
56
myself I had none, except that I might not have been a good enough
friend. (16) No womanly tears flowed from me; I did not kneel in
entreaty clutching anyone’s hands; I did nothing inappropriate for
a good person or a man. Rising above the dangers facing me, ready
to advance against those that threatened, I thanked fortune that she
had wanted to test how highly I valued loyalty. Something so im-
portant was not going to come cheaply to me. I did not spend long
(for they were not of equal weight) balancing up whether it was
preferable for me to die for loyalty or loyalty for me. (17) I did not
rush impetuously into an extreme course of action13 so that I could
escape the madness of the powerful. At the court of Gaius I used to
see torture, I used to see fire. I knew that under him human existence
had already deteriorated to the point where those who were killed
were held up as examples of mercy. Still, I did not fall on my sword
or leap into the sea with my mouth gaping wide, to avoid it seeming
that all I could do for the sake of loyalty was die.” (18) Add also that
your mind remained unconquered by gifts, and in the midst of all
that greedy competition your hand was never held out for gain; add
the frugality of your lifestyle, the decency of your conversation, your
kindness toward inferiors, and your respect for superiors. After this
ask yourself whether your account is true or false: if it is true, you
have been praised before an eminent witness; if false, you have made
a fool of yourself without a witness.
(19) Perhaps it now seems that I too am either attacking or testing
you. Believe whichever you like, and be afraid of everyone, beginning
with me. Listen to the well-known line of Virgil, “Loyalty is not safe
anywhere,”14 or of Ovid, “Where the earth extends, the wild Erinys
reigns: you would think they had conspired to be wicked,”15 or of
Menander (for who has not galvanized his great talents to address
this topic, out of loathing for the human race’s universal inclination
toward wrongdoing?): he says that everybody lives wickedly—the
poet has leaped onto the stage like a rustic—and he makes no ex-
ception for old people, or boys, or women, or men; and he adds that
it is not individuals who sin, nor small groups, but now crime is
intertwined <with crime>.16
(20) So one must flee and retreat into oneself, or better still, ac-
tually retreat from oneself. Although we are separated by the sea, I
shall try to perform this service for you: I shall grasp hold of you1757
On the Nile
at once and lead you to something better. And so that you do not
feel lonely, I shall join in conversation with you from here. We shall
be together in the best part of us;18 we shall exchange advice that
is not conditioned by the hearer’s expression. (21) I shall draw you
far away from your province to ensure that you do not think you
can place too much trust in history and do not begin to be pleased
with yourself whenever you think, “I have under my jurisdiction this
province, which has both supported and crushed the armies of the
most powerful cities, when it lay between Carthage and Rome as
the prize in a great war;19 the province saw the forces of four Roman
leaders,20 that is of the whole empire, brought together in one spot,
and it fed them;21 it raised up Pompey’s fortunes, exhausted Caesar’s,
handed over Lepidus’s, and found room for all their fortunes; (22) it
witnessed that great spectacle from which mortals could see clearly
how swift is the fall from highest to lowest, and by what varied
means fortune destroys great power. For at one and the same time
it saw Pompey and Lepidus cast down in different ways from the
topmost pinnacle to the depths, when Pompey fled from someone
else’s army, Lepidus from his own.”
(1.1) So that I can get you completely away from there, even
though there are many marvels within Sicily and nearby, for the
moment I shall bypass all the questions associated with your province
and shall draw your thoughts elsewhere. For I shall investigate with
you the topic I postponed in the previous book,22 why the Nile floods
as it does in the summer months. Philosophers have reported that the
Danube has similar characteristics, since its source is unknown and
it is fuller in summer than in winter. (2) Both claims have turned out
to be false: for we have discovered that its source is in Germany, and
that it does start to rise in summer, but at a time when the Nile still
remains at its usual level, as the hot weather is first beginning, and
the fiercer sunshine is melting the snows before the end of spring.
But all the snow has disappeared before the Nile starts to rise. For the
rest of summer, the level of the Danube falls; it returns to its winter
level and drops below it. But the Nile rises in the middle of summer,
<not> before the rising of the Dog Star;23 and it is still in flood after
the equinox.
(2.1) This is the most famous of the rivers that nature has exhib-
ited to human eyes. She has arranged for it to flood Egypt in theBook four a
58
period when the earth is scorched most fiercely by the heat and soaks
up the water more deeply, all set to drink enough to compensate for
the annual drought. For in the region that borders on Ethiopia, the
rains are either nonexistent or infrequent and of no help to a land
that is unfamiliar with rainwater. (2) As you know, Egypt rests its
hopes on this river alone: the fertility or barrenness of the year is in
proportion to the generosity or meanness of its flow. “None of the
ploughmen looks at the sky”: why should I not tease my favorite poet
and inflict on him his favorite poet,24 Ovid, who says “nor does the
grass pray to Jupiter of the Rains”?25
(3) If the place from which it begins to rise could be discovered,
the causes of its rising would also be found. As things stand, after
meandering through vast deserts, sprawling out into marshes, and
being dotted with huge <islands>, around Philae for the first time
it keeps together instead of wandering erratically. Philae is a rocky
island, steep on every side. It is encircled by two rivers on the point of
merging into one; they change into the Nile and bear its name.26 The
whole island accommodates a city. (4) From here the Nile is broad
rather than violent; it leaves Ethiopia and flows past the desert, which
is crossed by the route used for trade with the Indian sea. The river is
greeted by the Cataracts, a location famous for its magnificent spec-
tacle. (5) There the Nile surges up among high crags that are sheer at
many points, and increases its violence. For it crashes over the rocks
it encounters, struggles through narrows, and, wherever it is winning
or losing, it seethes. There its waters are whipped up for the first time,
when previously it had brought them without disturbance down a
gently sloping riverbed. Violent, raging, it rushes forward through
resentful channels. It no longer resembles itself, for up to now its
flow has been muddy and cloudy. But once it has struck the rocks and
sharp crags, it foams, and its color derives not from its own nature but
from the mistreatment it receives there. Finally, after battling through
the obstacles, it is left hanging and suddenly plunges down a huge
drop with an enormous din that fills the neighboring regions. A tribe
settled there by the Persians could not endure it, since their ears were
deafened by the continuous roar, so they moved to quieter parts.
(6) Among the marvels associated with the river, I have heard of
the unbelievable daring of the local inhabitants. They get into tiny
boats in pairs, with one of them steering, the other baling the boat59
On the Nile
out. Swirling around amid the rushing frenzy of the Nile and the
rebounding waves, they eventually reach very narrow channels that
enable them to escape through the rapids. Swept along with the en-
tire river, they control the careering boat by hand, and, to the great
terror of the spectators, they plummet headfirst; and when you have
given them up for lost and have supposed that they have sunk and
drowned in that vast mass of water, they are sailing far from the spot
where they fell, as if they had been catapulted. The waterfall does not
drown them but transports them into calm water.
(7) The first sign of the rise of the Nile is seen near the island I
have just mentioned, Philae. A short distance from there the river
is divided by a crag: the Greeks call it Abaton,27 and no one except
the priests treads on it. Those rocky outcrops experience the initial
rise in the river level. Then, after a considerable distance, two rocks
protrude—the local inhabitants call them the veins of the Nile; from
them a great quantity <of water> gushes out, but not enough to cover
Egypt. When the traditional festival comes around, the priests throw
offerings, and the prefects throw gifts of gold into the mouths of this
stream. (8) From this point on, the Nile clearly possesses new vigor,
and it flows in a deep, high-sided channel, prevented from expand-
ing outward by the mountains hemming it in. Near Memphis it is
at last free, and wanders over the plains, dividing into several rivers.
It branches out across the whole of Egypt in artificial canals, so that
the volume can be controlled by the irrigators. Initially it splits into
channels, then the waters merge and spread like a wide, muddy sea.
The breadth of the area over which it extends robs it of its speed
and violence, as it embraces the whole of Egypt to right and left.
(9) Hopes for the year are determined by the height to which the Nile
rises. The farmer’s calculations do not disappoint him, since the land
fertilized by the Nile responds to the level of the river. It brings both
water and soil to the sandy, dry earth. Since its current is turbulent, it
leaves all its sediment behind on the dry, cracked land, and any fertile
material it carries with it is smeared over the parched land. It assists
the fields for two reasons, both because it floods them and because it
coats them with mud. So any land it does not wash over remains bar-
ren and desolate. If it rises higher than it ought, it causes damage.
(10) So the character of this river is remarkable, because, while
other rivers wash away and gut the land, the Nile, so much largerBook four a
60
than the rest, far from eating away or eroding the ground, on the
contrary adds strength to it, and the least significant thing about it
is that it controls the moisture of the soil; for by importing mud it
soaks and binds together the sand, and Egypt owes to it not just the
fertility of the land but the land itself. (11) It is a most beautiful sight
once the Nile has poured across the fields. The plains are hidden, the
valleys are covered, and the towns stand out like islands. There are
no communications between the people living inland except by boat,
and the less people see of their land, the more delighted they are.
(12) Even while the Nile remains between its banks, it discharges
into the sea through seven mouths. Any of these you care to choose
is a large river; and even so it fans out in many <not> inconsiderable
branches28 toward different parts of the coast.
The Nile produces creatures equal to sea creatures both in size
and in harmfulness. Its scale can be judged from the fact that it ac-
commodates huge animals with sufficient food and with space for
them to move around. (13) Balbillus,29 an excellent man, exceptionally
refined in every branch of literature, tells of the following occurrence
when he himself was prefect in charge of Egypt. In the Heracleotic
mouth of the Nile, the largest of <the seven>, he saw the spectacle of,
as it were, a set-piece battle between dolphins coming in from the sea
and crocodiles from the river moving against them in a column. The
crocodiles were defeated by the gentle creatures with the harmless
bites. (14) The upper part of their body is hard and impenetrable even
to the teeth of larger animals, but the underneath part is soft and
tender. The dolphins dived and, with the spines they have sticking out
from their backs, wounded this part, splitting it open as they pushed
against it. When a number of them were torn apart in this way, the
rest, as it were, about-turned and fled—a cowardly creature when
faced with a bold one, though very bold when faced with a timid one!
(15) The inhabitants of Tentyra get the better of them not through
any unique advantage of race or birth, but through fearlessness and
recklessness. For they go after them, lasso them as they flee, and haul
them in. Many perish, the ones who are less alert in the pursuit.
(16) Theophrastus reports that the Nile once flowed with sea wa-
ter.30 It is well known that, when Cleopatra was queen, it did not rise
for two years in a row, in the tenth and eleventh years of her reign.3161
On the Nile
They say that this was a sign of the end for two rulers: for Antony
and Cleopatra’s power did come to an end. Callimachus reports that
in earlier centuries the Nile did not rise for nine years.32
(17) Now I shall proceed to investigate the causes of the Nile’s ris-
ing in summer, and I shall begin with the earliest writers. Anaxagoras
says that melted snows run from the mountains of Ethiopia right
down to the Nile.33 All of antiquity shared the same view: Aeschylus,
Sophocles, and Euripides34 relay it. But it is shown to be false by sev-
eral arguments. (18) First, the burnt color of the people demonstrates
that Ethiopia is very hot, and so do the Trogodytae, whose homes
are under ground. The rocks are boiling hot, as if heated by fire, not
just at midday, but toward evening too; the dust is burning hot, not
allowing people to walk on it. Silver becomes unsoldered, the joints
in statues melt, anything with a decorative metal plating loses that
outer layer. Also the south wind, which comes from that region, is the
hottest wind. None of the animals that hibernate in winter ever goes
into hiding; even in winter snakes are on the surface and in the open.
Even at Alexandria, which is a long way from the extreme heat, it
never snows; further inland there is no rain. (19) So how can a region
exposed to such intense heat have enough snow to last throughout
the summer? To be sure, some of the mountains there too may have
snow—but more than the Alps, more than the Thracian mountain
ranges or the Caucasus? Yet the rivers from these mountains rise in
spring and early summer, but then are lower than in winter; for in the
springtime the rains melt the snow, and the first warm weather dis-
perses the rest of it. (20) Neither the Rhine, nor the Rhone, nor the
lower Danube, nor the Cayster at the foot of Mount Tmolus swell in
summer; yet they too have very deep snow, as is natural in northerly
mountains.35 The Phasis too would rise in the same period, and the
Borysthenes, if snow could produce full rivers despite the summer.
(21) Besides, if this were the explanation for the rise of the Nile, it
would be at its fullest in early summer; for that is when the snows
are still largely intact and in a very soft state, starting to melt. But the
Nile floods for four months, and its level remains steady.
(22) If you believe Thales,36 the etesian winds37 oppose the down-
ward flow of the Nile and arrest its course by driving the sea into
its mouths: so it rebounds and flows back on itself. It does not growBook four a
62
in volume, but halts when prevented from exiting; it builds up and
bursts out in the first direction it can.
Euthymenes of Massilia presents his evidence:38 “I have sailed on
the Atlantic,” he says. “The Nile flows from there, and is fuller dur-
ing the season of the etesian winds;39 for then the sea is driven inland
by the force of the winds. When they have abated, the ocean settles
down, and the Nile flows down from there with less volume. Also,
the sea tastes fresh, and the wild animals resemble those on the Nile.”
(23) Why then, if the etesians spur on the Nile, does its rising be-
gin before them, and also continue after them? Besides, it does not
rise higher the more strongly they blow, and it is not slowed down or
speeded up depending on their force, which would happen if its rising
were caused by their influence. What about the fact that the etesians
batter the coast of Egypt, and the Nile flows down in the opposite
direction to them, but it would need to come from the same direction
as they do if it originated with them? Also, it would flow clear and blue
from the sea, and not in the muddy state in which it arrives. (24) Add
that his evidence is contradicted by a host of witnesses. At that period
there was scope for telling lies; since foreign regions were unknown,
it was possible for people to give fictitious reports. But now the entire
Atlantic coast is skirted by the ships of traders, and none of them talks
about the start of the Nile or a sea with a different taste; in the nature
of things this is incredible, because the sun draws out all the freshest
and lightest material.40 (25) Besides, why does it not rise in winter?
The sea can be stirred up by winds then as well, and by rather stronger
ones; for the etesians are moderate. If the river came from the Atlan-
tic, it would cover Egypt all at once; as things are, it rises gradually.
(26) Oenopides of Chius says that heat is confined below ground
in winter;41 consequently caves are hot, and the water in wells is
warmer, and so veins of water are dried up by the internal heat. In
other countries rivers are swollen by rain, but the Nile dwindles
because it is not supported by any rain. Then it rises in summer,
when the interior of the earth is cold and springs recover their chill.
(27) But if this were true, all rivers would rise in summer, and all
wells would be full of water in summer. Then it is wrong to say that
it is hotter underground in winter. So why are caves and wells warm?
Because they do not let the cold air in from outside. So they do not
acquire heat, but keep the cold out. They become cold in summer for[At this point the text breaks off in the manuscripts, and the rest of the
book is lost. However, John the Lydian, a Greek author of the fifth to sixth
centuries, gives an abbreviated paraphrase of chap. 2.17–30, and the im-
mediately following section of his work, which is translated below, prob-
ably paraphrases and summarizes lost portions of Seneca’s book.43
Herodotus44 says that the sun draws moisture from all the riv-
ers as it traverses the southern zone close to the earth, but when it
turns north toward summer, it calls on the Nile, and for this reason
it floods in summer.
63
On the Nile
the same reason, because they are remote and isolated and the hot
air does not reach them.
(28) Diogenes of Apollonia says,42 “The sun attracts moisture
to itself. The dried-up earth draws it from the sea and from other
sources of water. It is impossible for part of the earth to be dry and
part full of water: for everything is pierced by passages and intercon-
nected, and the dry parts draw on the wet ones. Otherwise, if the
earth acquired no <liquid>, it would have dried up. The sun attracts
moisture from everywhere, but especially from the regions where its
heat is intense: they are in the south. (29) When the earth becomes
dry, it draws more liquid to itself. Just as in lamps the oil flows to
where it is being burnt, so water heads in the direction in which the
force of the heat and the sweltering earth invites it. Where does it
draw it from? Well, of course, from the regions where it is always
winter. The north overflows with water: that is why the Black Sea
constantly flows swiftly into the Mediterranean, not with tides flow-
ing backward and forward like other seas, but always heading in
one direction, with a powerful current. If it were not the case that
everywhere had its deficit restored or its surplus discharged through
hidden channels, everywhere would be either dry or flooded by now.”
(30) I should like to ask Diogenes why, since everything is permeable
and interconnected, rivers do not rise in summer in every region.
“The sun bakes Egypt more intensely: therefore the Nile rises higher.
But in other countries as well there is some rise in the river levels.”
Then why is any region of the earth without water, since every region
draws it to itself from other regions, and in greater quantity the hot-
ter it is? And why does the Nile have fresh water, if it comes from
the sea? For no river tastes fresher . . .Book four a
64
The Egyptians say that the etesians drive all the clouds from
further north toward the south, and when heavy rains fall there, the
Nile surges up.
Ephorus of Cyme,45 in the first book of his Histories, says that
Egypt is naturally porous, and each year it is covered over with mud
brought down by the Nile, and in the hot season the river flows over
the lighter, more porous regions like sweat.
But Thrasyalces of Thasos says that the etesians make the Nile
flood:46 for Ethiopia is circled by mountains that are high in com-
parison to ours, and when it receives the clouds that are driven by the
etesians, the Nile flows out.
Callisthenes the Peripatetic47 reports in book four of his Greek
History that he went on campaign with Alexander of Macedon, and
when he was in Ethiopia, he discovered that the Nile flows down
from the endless rain that occurs there.
But Dicaearchus in his Tour of the World thinks that the Nile flows
from the Atlantic sea.48
Opinions about the Nile are varied, but so far the truth has eluded
us humans. According to the proverb, “Certainty is hidden deep.”]