Book 7 [originally Book 6]
On Comets
(1.1) No one is so slow and dull-witted and bowed down toward the
ground that he does not stand up straight and rise up with his whole
mind toward the divine, especially when some new marvel has shone
from the sky. As long as things follow their usual courses, familiarity
detracts from the greatness of the events; for we are so constituted
that everyday things, even if they deserve admiration, pass us by, and,
conversely, the sight of even the least important things gives pleasure
if their appearance is unusual. (2) So the host of stars that enhance
the beauty of this immense body1 does not draw a crowd; but when
something is different from normal, everyone’s gaze is fixed on the
sky. The sun has no spectators unless it is being eclipsed; no one ob-
serves the moon unless it is struggling. Then cities shout out, then,
through futile superstition, everyone makes a din to protect himself.2
(3) But how much more significant it is that the sun has as many
steps, so to speak, as it has days,3 and that it defines the year by its
orbit; that after the summer solstice it turns so as to make the days
shorter; that after the equinox it at once sinks and makes the nights
longer;4 that it hides the stars; that, though it is so much larger than
the earth, it does not burn it, but warms it, controlling its heat with
periods of greater and lesser intensity; that it never makes the moon
full except when it is on the opposite side, nor makes it dark <except
when it is adjacent>. (4) But we take no notice of all this as long as
regularity is maintained. If anything is disturbed, or something unac-
customed shines forth, we look, we question, we point. So natural is
it to be amazed at novelty rather than greatness.
(5) The same happens with comets: if a fiery body appears that
is rare and of unusual shape, everyone longs to know what it is; for-
getting the other bodies, they ask about the newcomer, not knowing
whether they ought to feel wonder or fear. For there is no shortage of
people who inspire terror, who base grim predictions on it. So people
are full of questions and want to discover whether it is a prodigy or
a star. (6) But, by Hercules, one could not inquire about anything
more magnificent or learn about anything more profitable than the
115book seven
116
nature of the stars and planets, whether they are a compact flame (as
is confirmed by our eyesight and by the light flowing and the heat
descending from them), or they are not spheres of flame, but solid,
earthy bodies, which do not shine of their own accord but draw
brightness and heat from the fiery regions through which they fly.
(7) Some distinguished men were of that opinion, believing that the
stars are constructed from solid matter and feed on external fire. “For
flame,” they say, “would naturally disperse unless it had something
to hold on to and be held by. A concentration of flame that was not
attached to a durable body would certainly by now have disintegrated
in the whirling motion of the world.”
(2.1) To pursue this investigation, it will be useful to ask whether
comets have the same status as the heavenly bodies just mentioned.
They seem to share some common features with them, namely, ris-
ings and settings, and also their appearance, even though it is dis-
persed and elongated; for they are just as fiery and bright. (2) So if all
the stars are made of earth, comets will have the same nature. But if
these are nothing but pure fire, and they last for six months without
being broken up by the rotation and the speed of the world, then the
stars too could consist of very fine matter and still not be dispersed by
the constant turning of the heavens. (3) Another reason for examin-
ing comets is so that we may know whether the world goes round as
the earth stands still, or the earth revolves as the world stands still.
There have been people who said that we are the ones whom nature
keeps on the move, though we do not know it, and that risings and
settings are not produced by the motion of the heavens, <but> we
ourselves rise and set. This issue deserves consideration, so that we
may know our own situation, whether we occupy a very inactive or
a very fast-moving position, whether god makes everything move
round us, or makes us move.
(3.1) It is essential to have records of past appearances of comets.
Their paths cannot yet be understood because of their infrequency,
nor can it be established whether they follow a cycle and appear
in accordance with an established pattern when their day arrives.
This branch of astronomical observation is new and was introduced
to Greece recently. (2) Democritus too,5 the most acute of all the
ancients, said he suspected that there are more moving stars, but
he did not give either their number or their names, for the motions117
On Comets
of the five stars were not yet understood.6 Eudoxus first introduced
knowledge of their orbits to Greece from Egypt,7 but he says noth-
ing about comets. From this it is clear that not even the Egyptians,
who had a very serious interest in the heavens, had developed this
area of astronomy. (3) Later on, Conon,8 another careful researcher,
catalogued the solar eclipses observed by the Egyptians; but he did
not mention comets, and if he had come across any discoveries in
their writings, he would not have omitted to say so.
(4.1) Two people say that they studied with the Chaldaeans: Epi-
genes, and Apollonius of Myndus, a great expert on investigating
horoscopes;9 but they disagree with each other. The latter says that
comets are included among the planets by the Chaldaeans, and their
courses are understood. Epigenes, on the other hand, says that the
Chaldaeans have made no discoveries about comets, but it seems that
they are set alight by a sort of whirlwind of fast-moving, twisting air.
So first, if you agree, let us describe his views and refute them.
(2) He thinks that the planet Saturn has a major influence over all
the motions of things in the atmosphere:10 “When it bears down on
the constellations closest to Mars, or crosses into the neighborhood
of the moon, or intercepts the sun’s rays, since it is windy and cold by
nature, it makes the air contract and mass together at many points;
then if it absorbs the sun’s rays, there is thunder and lightning; if
Mars is in conjunction as well, there are lightning-bolts. (3) Besides,”
he says, “lightning-bolts and lightning-flashes are made of different
material: for evaporation from water and any kind of moisture pro-
duce only flashes in the sky, which threaten without striking; but the
hotter, drier exhalation from the earth hammers out lightning-bolts.
Beams and torches,11 which differ from each other only in the size of
their fire, are formed as follows: (4) when a ball of air has enclosed
moist and earthy products in itself, what we call a whirlwind, then
wherever it travels, it presents the appearance of an elongated fire;
it lasts for as long as that accumulation of air, which carries a lot of
moist and earthy material along inside it.”
(5.1) To start with the last of his falsehoods, it is not true that
beams and torches are generated by a whirlwind. For a whirlwind is
formed and moves along near to the earth; so it tears trees up by the
roots, and wherever it attacks, it strips the ground bare, sometimes
grabbing hold of forests and buildings. It is usually below the clouds,book seven
118
and certainly never above them. On the other hand a higher region
of the sky displays beams, and so they never interrupt our view of
the clouds. (2) Besides, a whirlwind rushes along more swiftly than
any cloud and has a circular rotation; in addition it comes to an end
quickly, and destroys itself with its own force. Beams, however, do
not race across or fly past like torches, but stand still and shine in
the same region of the sky. (3) Certainly Charmander,12 in the book
he wrote about comets, says that Anaxagoras saw a massive and un-
usual light in the sky,13 the size of a large beam, and it shone for
many days. Callisthenes records that a similar shape, resembling an
elongated fire,14 shone before the sea overwhelmed Bura and Helice.15
(4) Aristotle says this was not a beam but a comet,16 but because of
the intense heat, the dispersed fire was not visible; yet as time went
on, once it was blazing less fiercely, the standard comet shape was
restored. In this fiery object there were many features deserving at-
tention, none more so than the fact that, as soon as it shone in the
sky, the sea covered Bura and Helice. (5) Could it be that Aristotle
believed that not only this beam but all beams are comets, the dif-
ference being that beams have unbroken fire, whereas comets have
dispersed fire? For beams have a steady flame that is not interrupted
or feeble at any point, and is dense at its extremities, as Callisthenes
records in the case I have just mentioned.
(6.1) “There are two kinds of comet,” says Epigenes. “Some spread
their brightness in all directions and do not change position; oth-
ers extend their scattered fire in one direction, like hair, and move
in relation to the fixed stars” (two of this sort have appeared in our
own day).17 “The first kind, which have hair on every side and are
motionless, are usually low down and are ignited by the same causes
as beams and torches, from disorderly, turbulent air that whirls round
with it many dry and moist particles that have been exhaled from the
earth. (2) For breath that is forced out through confined spaces can
ignite air above it that is full of suitable fuel for fire, then can propel
it upward from the lower levels, until for some reason it flows back
down again and becomes less intense. It can rise again the next day
and subsequent days, and can set the same region ablaze. For we see
winds come again on cue several days running; showers, also, and
other sorts of weather, return at the designated time.” (3) To express
his meaning briefly, he thinks these comets are produced in the same119
On Comets
way as the fires emitted by a whirlwind: there is just this difference,
that these fires are driven from above down to earth by the whirl-
wind, while comets fight their way upward from earth.
(7.1) There are many objections to this view. First, if wind were
responsible, a comet would never appear without a wind: but as a
matter of fact, they appear even in the calmest air. Then if they were
produced by wind, they would cease along with the wind; and if they
started with wind, they would increase with the wind, and the fiercer
it was, the brighter they would burn. There is this further point, that
wind propels many sections of the atmosphere, but a comet appears
in just one place; and wind does not reach the highest levels, but
comets are seen higher than winds can go.
(2) He then moves on to the comets that he says are more defi-
nitely like stars, because they move forward and pass the constella-
tions. He says that they are produced by the same causes as those he
called the lower comets; the only difference is that exhalations from
the earth carrying a lot of dry particles with them head for a higher
region and are pushed up by the north wind into the loftier reaches
of the heavens. (3) <But> if it were the north wind that pushed them,
they would always be driven southward, in the direction that this
wind blows: but they move in different directions, some east, some
west, all of them in a curve, and a wind would not produce such a path.
Then if the force of the north wind lifted them from the earth up
high, comets would not appear along with other winds; yet they do.
(8.1) Now let us rebut his other explanation (for he gives both):
“When any moist and dry matter that the earth has exhaled comes
together, the discord between these bodies turns the breath into a
whirlwind. Then anything enclosed within that powerful, revolving
wind is set on fire by its motion and lifted up high. The brightness
of the fire that is emitted lasts for as long as its fuel holds out; when
this comes to an end, the brightness dies down.” (2) Anyone who says
this fails to notice what the motion of whirlwinds and the motion of
comets are like: the first is swift, violent, and more rapid than winds
themselves; the motion of comets is gradual, and the distance covered
in a day and a night is imperceptible. Then the motion of whirlwinds
is erratic, disjointed, and, to use Sallust’s word,18 eddying, whereas
that of comets is regular, pressing on along a preordained course.
(3) Would any of us believe that the moon or the five stars are sweptbook seven
120
along by a wind or spun round by a whirlwind? I think not. Why?
Because their motion is not irregular and uncontrolled. Let us apply
the same argument to comets: they do not move in a confused or dis-
orderly manner, allowing someone to believe that they are impelled
by unruly, erratic causes. (4) Then even if those eddies could capture
earthy, moist particles and force them from down below to up above,
they still would not carry them higher than the moon. Their force
runs only as far as the clouds, but we see comets mingling with the
stars and gliding through the upper regions. Therefore it is not likely
that a whirlwind persists over such a great distance, for the larger it
is, the sooner it disintegrates. (9.1) So let him choose: either a slight
force will not be capable of reaching that high, or a great, vigorous
force will destroy itself first.
In addition, the reason why those lower comets do not go higher,
he thinks, is that they contain more earthy matter: their weight
keeps them close to earth. Yet there must be more abundant mate-
rial in the more enduring, higher comets; for they would not appear
for a longer time if they were not sustained by a greater supply of
nourishment.
(2) I was just saying that an eddying motion cannot last long or
rise higher than the moon or as far as the stellar region. Without
doubt a whirlwind is produced by several winds in competition with
each other. This competition cannot last for long; for after the breath
has revolved erratically and uncertainly, eventually all the winds sur-
render their power to one wind. (3) A violent storm is never long-
lasting: the greater the strength of gales, the shorter their duration;
when winds reach their maximum, they abate; any violent force is
inevitably driven toward its own extinction by its very intensity. So
nobody has watched a whirlwind for a whole day, not even for an
hour. Its speed is remarkable, and its brevity is remarkable. Also, it
revolves more violently and more swiftly at the earth’s surface and
near it. The higher it is, the less cohesive and the more volatile it is,
and so it disperses. (4) Add that, even if it did reach the highest level,
where the stars have their courses, it would certainly be broken up
by the motion that turns the universe. For what is swifter than the
rotation of the world? It would scatter the combined power of all
the winds together, and the solid, sturdy structure of the earth, never
mind a little bit of whirling air.121
On Comets
(10.1) And another point: a fire that has been carried by a whirl-
wind cannot remain high up unless the whirlwind itself also remains.
Now what is as incredible as a whirlwind lasting a long time, espe-
cially when its movement is overcome by a contrary movement? For
that region has its own whirling motion, which sweeps the heavens
along, “and carries the lofty stars and whirls them with swift revolu-
tion.”19 And even supposing you granted them some adjournment—
which is quite out of the question—what can be said about these
comets that have been visible for six months? (2) Then there would
have to be two movements in the same place, one of them that divine,
constant movement doing its job without interruption; the other a
new, recent one brought by the whirlwind. Inevitably one will inter-
fere with the other. Yet the orbiting of the moon and the motion of
the other stars above the moon are unalterable: they never hesitate
or pause or give us any reason to suspect that they have encountered
a delay. So it is incredible that a whirlwind, the most violent and
disruptive kind of storm, should reach right into the ranks of the
stars and rotate amid those ordered, tranquil bodies. (3) Let us sup-
pose that fire is ignited by the spinning of a whirlwind, is driven
from our level up to the heavens, and presents the impression and
the appearance of an elongated star: a fire, I think, must resemble the
thing that produces it. Now the shape of a whirlwind is round (for it
turns on the same spot and revolves like a spinning pillar): so the fire
confined within it must also resemble it. But a comet is elongated and
dispersed, and not at all like something with a circular form.
(11.1) Let us leave Epigenes and deal with the views of other
people. Before I begin to expound them, it must first be acknowl-
edged that comets are not seen just in one part of the sky, nor just in
the zodiac, but in both east and west alike, though most frequently
in the north. (2) They do not have the same shape, <but they are
essentially the same kind of thing.> The Greeks have distinguished
between those that have flame hanging down like a beard, those that,
as it were, scatter their hair in all directions round them, and those
that have fire spreading out but tapering to a point; and yet all these
are the same kind of thing and are correctly called comets. (3) Since
their forms appear at long intervals, it is difficult to compare them
with each other. Even at the time of their appearance, observers do
not agree about their characteristics, but, according as each personbook seven
122
has sharper or weaker eyesight, so he says it is either brighter or red-
der, and the hairs are either drawn inward or spread out sideways.20
But whether there are different kinds or not, comets must all be
produced in the same way. One thing must be agreed, that, contrary
to normal, a strange kind of star is seen trailing a fire that spreads
out around it.
(12.1) Some of the ancients adopt the following explanation. When
one of the planets comes into conjunction with another, the light of
the two is merged into one, and the appearance of an elongated star
is created. This occurs not only when one planet touches another, but
even when it comes close, for the gap between the two is illuminated
by them both and set alight, and produces an elongated fire. (2) Our
response to this will be that there is a fixed number of moving stars,
and regularly both they and a comet appear simultaneously, from
which it is clear that the comet is not produced by their conjunction
but is distinct and independent. (3) Also, one star frequently moves
below the path of a higher star: Saturn is sometimes above Jupiter,
and Mars looks down vertically on Venus or Mercury, but a comet is
not created by their conjunction, when one passes below the other.
Otherwise they would be produced every year, for every year some
stars are together in the same sign of the zodiac. (4) If a comet were
created by one star moving above another, it would cease to exist in
a moment. For the stars pass at high speed, and so all eclipses are
short-lived, because the same motion that brought them together
swiftly separates them. We see the sun and moon set free within a
brief interval after their eclipse has begun: how much swifter the
separation must be in the case of much smaller stars. Yet comets last
for six months, which would not happen if they were generated by
the convergence of two stars. They cannot remain together for long:
the laws controlling their velocity must separate them.
(5) Besides, they seem to us to be close together, but they are sepa-
rated by huge distances. So how can one star transmit fire to another
star so that they appear to be joined, when they are separated by a
huge space? (6) “The light of two stars is blended,” someone replies,
“and presents the appearance of a single star; in just the same way a
cloud turns red when sunlight strikes it, in just the same way things
are golden-colored at dawn or dusk, in just the same way a rainbow
or second sun becomes visible.” (7) In the first place, all these phe-123
On Comets
nomena are produced by a powerful force, for it is the sun that sets
them alight; stars do not have the same effect. Next, all of these phe-
nomena are only generated below the moon and close to the earth;
the higher regions are pure, unsullied, and constantly maintain their
own color. (8) Also, if something like that did occur, it would not last
but would soon be extinguished, just as the garlands that circle the
sun or moon disappear within a very short time. Not even a rainbow
continues for long. If there were something capable of blurring the
gap between two stars, it would dissolve just as quickly; certainly it
would not last for as long as comets usually remain. The stars move
within the zodiac, they keep to this track; but comets are seen every-
where. They no more have a fixed time when they must appear than
a fixed space they must not move out of.
(13.1) Against this objection Artemidorus says the following:21
it is not that only these five stars move erratically, but only these
ones have been observed; however, countless others circle unseen,
unknown to us either because of the dimness of their light, or be-
cause the orientation of their orbits means that they are visible only
when they reach the extremities of the orbits. “So,” he says, “some
stars appear that are new to us; they blend their light with the regular
stars and stretch out a larger fire than stars usually do.” (2) This is the
least important of the lies he tells. His whole account of the world
is a shameless lie. If we believe him, the outer edge of the heavens is
completely solid, “hard, like a roof, with a thick, dense body formed
by atoms assembled and amassed together. (3) Next to it is a fiery
layer, so densely compacted that it cannot be broken up or damaged;
it has some breathing-holes and windows, as it were, through which
fires pour in from outside the world, not big enough to disturb the
interior, <***>22 again they flow from the world to the outside. So
these things that appear unexpectedly have poured in from the mat-
ter located outside the world.”
(14.1) Rebutting these ideas is just like sticking out your arm and
punching at the wind. I should like this fellow who has constructed
such a solid ceiling over the world to tell me why we should take his
word for it that the thickness of the heavens is so great. What was it
that could transport such solid bodies up there and keep them there?
(2) Next, anything that is as thick as that is necessarily very heavy
as well: so how do heavy objects remain at the highest level? Whybook seven
124
does that structure not fall down and break under its own burden? It
is impossible for such an enormous weight as he suggests to remain
suspended and be supported by something light. (3) Nor can it be
said that there are some cables outside to prevent it from falling, nor,
again, that in the middle there is some support in place to take the
weight of its looming body and prop it up. Again, no one will dare
to say that the world is moving through infinite space and is actu-
ally falling without it being apparent whether it is falling, because
its headlong descent is eternal, since it has nothing at the bottom to
collide with. (4) Some people have said this about the earth, since
they could find no explanation for its mass being stationary in the air.
“It is moving constantly,” they say, “but it is not apparent whether it
is falling, because it is falling into infinite space.”
Next, how will you prove that there are not just five planets, but
many of them, and in many regions of the world? Or if one may
vouch for this without any credible evidence, why should someone
not say either that all the stars move like planets, or that none does?
Besides, that host of stars wandering all over the place is no help to
you: for the more there are, the more often they will encounter oth-
ers; but comets are rare, which is what makes them remarkable.
(15.1) What do you say to the fact that every age that has ob-
served the appearance of such stars and recorded them for posterity
will testify against you? After the death of Demetrius, king of Syria,
whose children were Demetrius and Antiochus, shortly before the
Achaean war,23 a comet shone brightly, no smaller than the sun. At
first it was a fiery, reddish circle, emitting bright light sufficient to
overcome the darkness; then gradually its size contracted, and its
brightness faded, and finally it disappeared totally. So how many stars
must converge to produce such a large body? Even if you gather a
thousand together in one place, they will never match the appear-
ance of the sun. (2) In the reign of Attalus,24 to begin with, a comet
of modest size appeared; later it rose higher, spread out, and reached
as far as the equinoctial circle, extending to enormous length, as big
as the stretch of the heavens called the Milky Way. How many plan-
ets need to congregate in order to fill such a long section of the
heavens with continuous fire?
(16.1) We have spoken against the arguments; we need to speak
against the witnesses. It does not require great effort to destroy the125
On Comets
authority of Ephorus:25 he is a historian. Some of them court popu-
larity with tales of the unbelievable and use marvelous stories to
engage the reader who will turn to something else if presented with
a series of everyday events. Some of them are gullible, some are neg-
ligent. Falsehood takes some by surprise, and is welcomed by others;
the former do not avoid it, the latter seek it out. (2) This applies
generally to the whole tribe of historians, who do not think their
work can win approval and become popular without a sprinkling of
falsehood. Ephorus is not someone of the most scrupulous reliability:
he is often deceived, more often he deceives, as in the case of this
comet, which was watched by the eyes of all humankind, because it
brought about the occurrence of a major event, drowning Helice and
Bura at its appearance. He says it separated into two stars; but apart
from him no one has reported this. (3) Who could have observed
that moment at which the comet broke up and was reduced to two
pieces? How come, if there is somebody who has seen a comet being
split in two, that nobody has seen one forming from two stars? Why
did he not add what stars it divided into, since it must have been
some of the five stars?
(17.1) Apollonius of Myndus takes a different view:26 he says not
that one comet is produced from many planets, but that many comets
are planets. “It is not a deceptive illusion,” he says, “nor fire spread-
ing out when two stars are close, but a comet is an individual heav-
enly body just like the sun and moon. Its shape is as we see it, not
confined in a circle, but more extended, stretching out lengthwise.
(2) But its course is not discernible: it cuts through the higher levels
of the world and only becomes visible when it reaches the lowest
point of its course. We should not think that the same comet was
seen in Claudius’s reign as we saw in Augustus’s, nor that the one
that appeared in Nero Caesar’s reign and did away with the ill repute
of comets was similar to the one that emerged after the departure of
the deified Julius at the games of Venus Genetrix at around 5 p.m. 27
(3) There are many comets of various sorts, unequal in size, dissimilar
in color: some are red without any brightness; others are brilliant,
with pure, clear light; others are like flame, not pure or fine, but with
a lot of smoky heat billowing out around them; some are blood-red
and menacing, because they present an omen of bloodshed to come.
Comets reduce and increase their brightness just like other stars thatbook seven
126
are brighter and larger when they have descended, because they are
seen at closer quarters, but are smaller when they reverse direction,
and dimmer, because they are moving further away.”28
(18.1) An immediate response to this is that what happens in the
case of comets is different from what happens in the case of other
heavenly bodies. For comets are at their greatest size on the day they
first appear. They ought to get bigger the nearer they approach, but
as things are, their initial appearance continues until they begin to
disappear. Then the argument used against earlier people also applies
to him: if the comet followed a wandering path and were a planet,
it would move within the boundaries of the zodiac, within which all
the planets confine their courses. (2) One star is never visible through
another star; our eyesight cannot pass through the middle of a planet
so as to see through it to what is above; but one can see through a
comet, just as through a cloud, to what is beyond. This shows that it
is not a planet but a faint, impromptu fire.
(19.1) Our own Zeno holds the following view:29 he thinks that
stars converge and amalgamate their rays; from this coalition of light
the impression of an elongated star is created.
So some people think that comets do not really exist, but their
appearance is produced by reflections from neighboring stars, or by
the conjunction of stars that coalesce. (2) Others say that they do ex-
ist, but have their own orbits and emerge to human view after fixed
intervals. Others say they do exist, but are not what you could call
stars, because they fade away and do not last for long, disintegrating
after a brief period of time.
(20.1) Most of our school hold this view and do not think that
it conflicts with the truth. For we see various kinds of fire being
formed up in the sky: sometimes the sky blazes, sometimes “long
tracks of flames gleam in their wake,” 30 sometimes torches are swept
along with a huge fire. Lightning-bolts themselves, though with their
remarkable speed they instantaneously flash past our sight and leave
it far behind, are fires produced by air undergoing friction and col-
liding against itself with enormous force. So they do not linger, but,
once ejected, they fly along and soon disappear. (2) But other kinds
of fire do last for a long time, and do not disperse until all the fuel
on which they were feeding has been used up. To this category be-
long the remarkable phenomena that Posidonius writes about,31 blaz-127
On Comets
ing columns, and shields, and other notable, strange kinds of flame,
which would not attract attention if they followed regular courses
and obeyed the law. Everyone is astonished at these phenomena that
produce an unexpected fire from on high, whether something flashes
out and disappears, or it stands still, like a marvel, when condensed
air is concentrated and turns into fire. (3) And tell me: does a cavity
not sometimes open up as the aether retreats backward, and a huge
light appears in the depression? You might exclaim, “What is this?
‘I see the heavens parting in the middle and stars wandering in the
firmament’”;32 they sometimes shine without waiting for night time,
and burst into view in the middle of the day. But there is a differ-
ent sort of explanation for their appearing in the atmosphere at the
wrong time, for it is agreed that they are there even when they are
hidden. (4) We fail to see many comets because they are concealed
by the sun’s rays. Posidonius records that once when the sun was
eclipsed a comet appeared,33 which the nearby sun had hidden from
view. Often when the sun has set, scattered fires appear not far from
it; clearly the star itself is bathed in the sun’s light and so cannot be
seen, but its hair escapes the sun’s rays.
(21.1) So our people agree that comets, like torches, like trumpets
and beams and other celestial portents, are produced by dense air.
Therefore they appear most commonly in the north, which has the
greatest quantity of sluggish air. (2) So why does a comet not stand
still but move forward? I shall explain: like fire, it follows its suste-
nance; although its natural tendency is upward, still, if its fuel gives
out, it moves back and descends of its own accord. In the air too it
does not push to right or left—in fact it has no path—but creeps
along where a stretch of fodder leads it; it does not advance like a
star but feeds like a fire. (3) So why does it appear for a long period
and not get swiftly extinguished? The comet that we have seen in the
most fortunate principate of Nero remained visible for six months,
traveling round in the opposite direction to the Claudian comet. For
the earlier one, rising from the north toward the zenith, made for the
east, growing dimmer all the time; the recent one started in the same
quarter, but, as it made for the west, it turned south, and disappeared
from view there. (4) Evidently the earlier one found smokier mate-
rial, more suitable for fire, <in that region,> and followed it; whereas
the recent one found the other region richer and more plentiful,book seven
128
and so it descended in that direction, attracted by the fuel, not the
path. The path clearly differed in the case of the two comets we have
watched, since the one moved to the right, the other to the left. But
all the planets move in the same direction, that is, opposite to the
movement of the world (which rotates from east to west, while the
planets go from west to east). So they have a twofold motion: with
one they go their own way, with the other they are carried along.
(22.1) I do not agree with our people: for I think of a comet not as
a fire that appears from nowhere, but as one of the eternal products
of nature. In the first place, everything created from air is short-lived,
for it is generated in an evanescent, impermanent substance. How
can anything stay the same for a long time in the air, when the air
itself never stays the same for long? It is constantly flowing, and its
periods of rest are brief. In a fleeting moment it changes to a differ-
ent state from the one it was in, now rainy, now fine, now fluctuat-
ing between the two. Clouds are very closely related to the air, for it
congeals into them and dissolves out of them: they gather together at
one moment, move apart at the next, and never stay still. It is impos-
sible for a steady fire to reside in a changeable body and to remain
there as persistently as the things that nature has arranged should
never be driven off course. (2) Then, if the fire stuck with its fuel, it
would always descend, for air is thicker the closer it is to earth. But
comets never sink right down or get close to the ground.
(23.1) Again, fire goes either where its nature takes it, that is up-
ward, or where it is dragged by the material it has clung to and
feeds on. None of the regular, celestial fires has a winding course: it
is characteristic of a star to describe a circle. Whether other comets
have done this I do not know: but two in our lifetime have. (2) Next,
everything set alight by a temporary cause quickly dies down: so
torches blaze while they pass by; so lightning-bolts are powerful
enough for only one strike; so what are called shooting or falling
stars fly across and cut through the air. No fires except <the celestial
ones> linger on their own territory—I am talking about the divine
fires that the world maintains eternally, because they are its parts
and its products. They are active, they move forward, they maintain
their trajectory, and they remain constant. Would they not get bigger
and smaller on alternate days if their fire suddenly accumulated for
some reason or other? For it would be smaller or bigger depending129
On Comets
on whether it was fed more generously or more meanly. (3) I was
just saying that no fire that flares up in some impurity in the air is
long-lasting. Now I am going further: it cannot last and stand still at
all, for torches, and lighting-bolts, and shooting stars, and any other
kind of fire ejected by air are on the run and are not seen except while
they are falling. A comet has its own position, and so is not emitted
swiftly, but measures out its course; it is not extinguished, but makes
an exit.
(24.1) “If it were a planet,” someone says, “it would be in the zo-
diac.” Who is imposing a single path on the planets? Who is forcing
the divine within narrow limits? Indeed, these very stars that you all
believe are the only ones that move each have different orbits. So
why should there not be some that move away on a path of their own
that is distant from the others? Why should there be no access to a
particular region of the heavens? (2) But if you do think that no star
can move unless it is in contact with the zodiac, a comet can have a
different orbit, but one that coincides with the zodiac in part. This is
not necessarily what happens, but it is possible. Just think: is it not
more appropriate to the world’s greatness for it to be divided into
many paths as it rotates, and not to wear away one track while the
rest of it lies idle? (3) Do you believe that, in this huge, immensely
beautiful body, out of the countless stars that adorn the night with
their varied beauty and will not let it be empty and inactive, there are
only five that are permitted to take any exercise, while the rest stand
still, a static, motionless population?
(25.1) At this point someone may ask me, “Why then has the
course of these comets not been observed in the same way as that of
the five stars?” I shall give him this answer: there are many things that
we admit exist, but we do not know what they are like. (2) Everybody
will agree that we have a mind, by whose commands we are driven on
and called back. But what the mind is, this controller and master of
ours, no one will explain to you, any more than he will explain where
it is: one person will say that it is breath, another that it is a kind of
harmony, another that it is a divine power, a portion of god, another
that it is the finest part of the soul, another that it is an incorporeal
power; someone will be found to say it is blood or heat.34 So far from
being able to acquire a clear grasp of other things, the mind is still
trying to understand itself.book seven
130
(3) So why are we surprised that comets, such a rare spectacle in
the world, cannot yet be described by fixed laws, that neither their
starting points nor their finishing points are yet known, seeing that
they reappear after enormously long intervals? Fifteen hundred years
have not yet passed since Greece “numbered and named the stars”;35
still today there are many nations that know only the outward ap-
pearance of the heavens, that do not yet understand why the moon
is eclipsed, why <the sun> is darkened. Among us, too, reason has
only recently found a reliable answer to these questions. (4) There
will come a day when the passage of time and the efforts of a longer
stretch of human history will bring to light things that are now ob-
scure. One lifetime, even if it can be wholly devoted to astronomy, is
not sufficient for the investigation of such important matters. And
just think of how we divide our tiny number of years unequally be-
tween our studies and our vices. So it will take a long succession
of people to explain these matters. (5) There will come a day when
our descendants are astonished that we did not know such obvious
facts. These five stars force themselves on our attention, and, as they
constantly appear in different places, make us inquisitive; but what
their morning and evening risings are, what are their stations, when
they move straight ahead, why they are driven backward—all this
we have only just begun to understand. Whether Jupiter was ris-
ing, or setting, or retrograde—for they have applied that term to his
retreating—we learned just a few years ago. (6) People have been
found telling us, “You are wrong to think that any star either halts
its course or changes it. The celestial bodies cannot stand still or be
turned aside: they all move forward; they proceed just as they first
began. Their motion will end only when they do. The movements of
this eternal structure are unalterable: if they ever stop, things that are
currently conserved by their regularity and constancy will crash into
each other.” (7) Why is it, then, that some of them look as though
they are going backward? The approach of the sun gives them an
appearance of slowness, as does the nature of their paths and their
orbits, so positioned that at a particular time they mislead observers;
thus ships, though they are moving under full sail, nevertheless look
as though they are standing still. One day there will be someone
who demonstrates where comets have their orbits, why they wander
so far from the rest, how big they are, and what they are like. Let us131
On Comets
be content with what has been discovered: let our descendants also
contribute something to the truth.
(26.1) “We do not see through stars to things beyond,” someone
says, “but our eyesight passes through comets.” First of all, if that hap-
pens, it happens not where the star itself is—it is made of dense, solid
fire—but where a faint brightness extends and scatters like hair: you
are seeing through gaps between the fire, not through the fire itself.
(2) “All stars are round,” the person says, “but comets are extended,
which shows they are not stars.” But who is granting you that comets
are elongated? Their nature, like that of the other stars, is a sphere;
it is their brightness that extends. The sun sends its rays out far and
wide, but its shape is different from the shape of the light flowing
from it. In just the same way, the bodies of comets are rounded, but
their brightness seems longer than that of the other stars.
(27.1) “Why?” you ask. You first tell me why the moon displays
a light so different from the sun’s, although it receives it from the
sun; why it is sometimes red, sometimes pale; why it has a grey, dark
color when it is prevented from seeing the sun. (2) Tell me why all
the stars to some extent have different appearances, quite distinct
from the sun. Just as nothing prevents them from being stars, even
though they are not similar, so nothing prevents comets from being
eternal and of the same kind as the rest, even if they do not have a
similar appearance. (3) And tell me: the world itself, if you think
about it, is it not made up of contrasting components? Why is it that
when the sun is in Leo it always blazes and bakes the earth with its
heat; in Aquarius it freezes winter solid and blocks the rivers with
ice? Both these constellations are essentially the same kind of thing,
although they are dissimilar in effect and nature. Aries rises in a very
short time, Libra appears very slowly. Yet both of these constellations
have the same nature, though one ascends in a brief time, the other
takes a long time to emerge. (4) Don’t you see how the elements
contrast with each other? They are heavy and light, cold and hot,
wet and dry; all the world’s harmony is created from disharmonious
constituents. Do you say that a comet is not a star because its shape
does not correspond to a particular model, and it is not like other
stars? Of course you can see that the star that returns to its start-
ing point thirty years later36 is very similar to the one that revisits
its home within a year!37 (5) Nature does not produce her creationbook seven
132
according to a single pattern, but rejoices in variety: she has made
some things bigger than others, some faster, some stronger, some
more moderate; she has separated some from the crowd, so that they
move conspicuously, on their own, but has sent others to join the
herd. Anyone who thinks that nature is not entitled to do something
occasionally unless she does it often does not know nature’s power.
(6) Nature displays comets infrequently and assigns them a different
place, different timetables, and motions unlike the rest: she wanted
to enhance the grandeur of her creation with them too. Their form is
too beautiful for you to regard it as the product of chance, whether
you consider their size or their brightness, which is greater and fierier
than the other stars. There is something special and unique about
their appearance, which is not tightly constricted and contained, but
freely spread out, covering the territory of many stars.
(28.1) Aristotle says that comets indicate stormy weather,38 with
severe winds and rain. So, do you not think that something that can
foretell the future is a star? It is not a sign of stormy weather in the
way that “sputtering oil and crumbly snuff collecting on the wick”
are signs of future rain,39 or in the way that it is a forecast of wild
seas if “the sea birds play on dry land, and the heron abandons its
familiar marshes and flies above the high cloud”;40 but in the way
that the equinox is a sign of the year turning hot or cold, or in the
way that Chaldaean prophecies indicate the sad or happy future that
a star determines for people at their birth.41 (2) To show you that
this is so, a comet does not threaten wind or rain as soon as it ap-
pears, as Aristotle says, but it makes the whole year suspect; which
shows that it does not derive signs from the immediate locality for
the immediate locality, but it has signs laid down and provided for
by the laws of the world. (3) The comet that appeared in the consul-
ship of Paterculus and Vopiscus42 did what was predicted by Aris-
totle and Theophrastus;43 for there were violent, continual storms
everywhere, while in Achaea and Macedonia cities were destroyed
by earthquakes.
(29.1) “Their slowness,” someone says, “proves that they are very
heavy and contain a lot of earthlike material; so does their path, for
they are usually driven toward the poles.” Both arguments are wrong.
I shall deal with the first one first. So, you say, what travels more
slowly is heavy? What about Saturn, which completes its course most133
On Comets
slowly of all the planets? Is it heavy? No, the proof of its lightness
is that it is higher than the rest. (2) “But,” you say, “it goes round in
a larger orbit, and does not go slower than the rest but further.” It
may occur to you that I could say the same about comets, even if
their progress were more sluggish. But is not true that they go more
slowly: for the most recent one crossed half the heavens within six
months, and the previous one retreated within fewer months. (3) “But
it is because they are heavy that they are driven lower.” First of all,
what is driven round is not driven down. Secondly, the most recent
comet began its movement in the north, arrived in the south, via the
west, and disappeared as it was rising higher; the Claudian one, first
seen in the north, never stopped climbing steadily higher in a straight
line until it vanished.
These are the views concerning comets that have excited other
people or me: whether they are true, the gods know, for they possess
knowledge of the truth. We are only permitted to grope around for
it and to advance into the darkness by means of conjecture, with no
confidence of discovering something—though not without hope.
(30.1) Aristotle said,44 in admirable fashion, that we never need
greater humility than when the gods are under discussion. If we enter
temples with composure, if when we are going to a sacrifice we have a
humble demeanor, we straighten our toga, and we assume every mark
of modesty, how much more ought we to do this when we are arguing
about the stars, about the planets, about the nature of the gods, in
order to avoid making incautious or ignorant assertions, or know-
ingly making false statements! (2) Let us not be surprised that things
buried so deeply take so long to unearth. Panaetius and others want
comets to be thought of not as ordinary stars,45 but as the deceptive
appearance of a star. They should carefully examine whether every
part of the year is equally adapted to producing comets, whether
every region of the sky is suited to their generation, whether they
can be seen wherever they can go, and so on. All these questions are
eliminated when I say they are not fires that happen by chance but
are integral to the world; it does not display them often, but it makes
them move in invisible regions.
(3) How many things besides comets follow remote paths, never
appearing to human eyes! For god did not make everything for hu-
man beings. How small a part of this vast creation is entrusted to us!book seven
134
He who manages all this, who created it, who laid the foundations
for it all and surrounded himself with it, and who is the greater and
better part of his creation, he eludes our sight and must be perceived
by thought. (4) Also, many things that are related to the supreme de-
ity and have been assigned power akin to his are obscure; or perhaps,
what may surprise you more, they both swamp our vision and elude
it, whether they are so insubstantial that human sight cannot perceive
them, or such greatness hides itself in holier seclusion, concealing
its kingdom, that is, itself, and granting access to nothing except the
mind. We cannot discover what this thing is without which nothing
exists; and yet we are surprised that we know too little about some
mere fires, when the greatest part of the world, god, is hidden!
(5) How many animals we have discovered for the first time in
this generation, how many not even in this one! The people of a fu-
ture age will know much that is unknown to us; much is being kept
for the generations to come after memory of us has faded away. The
world is a paltry thing unless it contains something for every age to
discover. (6) Some holy secrets are not passed on all at once: Eleusis
keeps things to reveal to those who come back;46 nature does not pass
on all its holy secrets at once. Do we think we have been initiated?
We are stuck in the entrance hall. Those mysteries are not revealed
indiscriminately or to everyone: they are kept back, locked up in the
inner sanctuary, and our generation will see something, but the one
that comes after us will see something else.
(31.1) So when will our knowledge encompass all this? Great
enterprises progress slowly, especially if effort falters. We have not
yet completed the one task to which we apply our whole minds—
becoming as immoral as possible. Vice is still in progress. Luxury dis-
covers something new to go crazy over, sexual immorality discovers
a new indignity to inflict on itself, the moral collapse and corruption
that stem from self-indulgence discover something more voluptuous,
more sensuous, to die for. (2) We have not yet got rid of every trace of
soundness; we are still stamping out any remains of good character.
With our sleek, glossy bodies, we have overtaken female beauty treat-
ments; we men wear prostitutes’ colors that married women would
not put on; we tiptoe along with delicate, mincing steps (we do not
walk but parade); we adorn our fingers with rings; a jewel is arranged
on every joint. (3) Daily we devise ways of damaging our masculin-135
On Comets
ity, so that it may suffer degradation since it cannot be discarded:
one man cuts off his genitals, another escapes to the obscene section
of the gladiators’ school, and, when hired out to die, he chooses a
shameless type of armor in which he can indulge his sickness even
on the point of death.47
(32.1) Are you surprised that wisdom has not yet completed the
whole of its task? Wickedness has not yet revealed itself completely;
it is still coming to birth, and yet we are all at its service; our eyes,
our hands are its slaves. But wisdom—who goes anywhere near that?
Who thinks it deserves more than a passing acquaintance? Who
takes any notice of a philosopher or of any of the liberal arts, except
when the games are postponed, or when there is a rainy day that
they feel like frittering away? (2) That is why so many philosophi-
cal lineages are dying out without a successor: the Academics, both
the old ones and the newer ones,48 have left behind no high priest.
Who is there to hand on the teachings of Pyrrho?49 The Pythagorean
school, unpopular with the common people, cannot find a teacher.
The new sect of the Sextii,50 with its Roman vigor, died out while it
was beginning, though it had started with a great impact. (3) But
what enormous efforts people make to guard against the name of any
pantomime actor disappearing! The house of Pylades and Bathyllus51
is maintained by their successors; these skills find many students and
many teachers. Private stages resound throughout the city: on them
men and women waltz; males and married women compete to see
who can move their hips more sensuously. Then when their brow
has been chafed for a long while beneath a mask, they transfer to a
helmet.52 No one cares about philosophy. (4) Far from any discoveries
being made on topics left inadequately researched by the ancients,
many earlier discoveries are falling into oblivion. Yet, by Hercules, if
we set about the subject with all our might, if young people sobered
up and put their backs into it, if older people taught it, younger
people learned it, we would hardly get to the bottom where the truth
is located; at the moment we are scraping at the surface with feeble
hands in our search for it.