Seneca and His World
E l i z a be t h A sm is, Sh a di B a r t s ch, a n d M a r t h a C. N ussb au m
Seneca once remarked of Socrates that it was his death by hem-
lock that made him great (Letter 13.14). With reason: Socrates’ death
demonstrated the steadfastness of his philosophical principles and
his belief that death offered nothing to fear. When Seneca himself,
then, was ordered to commit suicide by Nero in 65 ce, we might well
believe Tacitus’s account in his Annals (15.63) that the Roman Stoic
modeled his death on that of Socrates, discoursing calmly about phi-
losophy with his friends as the blood drained out of his veins. In
Tacitus’s depiction we see, for once, a much-criticized figure living
up to the principles he preached.
Seneca’s life was mired in political advancement and disappoint-
ment, shaped by the effects of exile and return, and compromised
by his relationship with the emperor Nero—first his pupil, then his
advisee, and finally his murderer. But his many writings say little
about his political career and almost nothing about his relationship
with Nero except for what can be gleaned from his essay On Clem-
ency, leaving us to turn to later sources for information—Tacitus,
Suetonius, and Dio Cassius in particular. We know that Seneca was
born to a prominent equestrian family in Corduba, Spain, some time
between 4 and 1 bce. He was the second of three sons of Helvia and
Lucius Annaeus Seneca (the youngest son, Annaeus Mela, was the
father of the poet Lucan). The elder Seneca had spent much of his
life in Rome, and Seneca himself was brought to Rome as a young
boy. There he was educated in rhetoric and later became a student of
the philosopher Sextius. But his entry into political life was delayed,
and when he did enter upon the cursus honorum late in Tiberius’s
reign, his ill health (he had asthma and possibly tuberculosis) was
a source of difficulty. In any case his career was cut short. He sur-
vived Caligula’s hostility, which the sources tell us was thanks to his
talents in oratory, but was sent into exile on Corsica by Claudius
shortly after Caligula’s death in 41 ce. The charge, almost certainly
false, was adultery with Caligula’s younger sister, Julia Livilla. Seneca
spent his time in exile in philosophical and natural study and wrote
viiseneca and his world
viii
the Consolations to Helvia (his mother) and to Polybius (Claudius’s
freedman secretary), revealing in the latter how desperately he hoped
to be recalled to Rome.
When Seneca did return in 49 ce, it was under different auspices.
Claudius had recently remarried, to Germanicus’s daughter Agrip-
pina, and she urged him to recall Seneca as tutor to her son, the
twelve-year-old Nero. Claudius already had a younger son, Britan-
nicus, but it was clear that the wily Agrippina wished to see her own
flesh and blood on the throne. When Claudius died five years later,
Agrippina was able to maneuver Nero into position as emperor—and
Britannicus was dispatched by poison shortly after, in 55 ce.
From 54 until his influence waned at the end of the decade, Seneca
acted as Nero’s advisor, together with the praetorian prefect Sextus
Afranius Burrus. We know he wrote a speech on clemency for Nero
to deliver to the Senate soon after his accession, and Seneca’s own
essay On Clemency may contain some inkling of his strategy to keep
the young emperor from running amok. Seneca’s use of the term rex,
or king, applied to Nero by analogy in this piece, is surprising from
a Roman senator, but he seems to have hoped that flattering Nero
by pointing to his limitless power and the value of clemency would
be one way to keep him from abusing that power. Both Seneca and
Burrus also helped with the civil and judicial administration of the
empire.
Many historians, ancient and modern, feel that this early part of
Nero’s reign, moderated by Seneca and Burrus, represented a period
of comparative good rule and harmony (the “quinquennium Nero-
nis”). The decline started in 59 ce with Nero’s murder of Agrippina,
after which Seneca wrote the emperor’s speech of self-exculpation—
perhaps the most famous example of how the philosopher found
himself increasingly compromised in his position as Nero’s chief
counsel. Certainly as a Stoic, Seneca cuts an ambiguous figure next
to the others who made their opposition to Nero clear, such as Thra-
sea Paetus and Helvidius Priscus. His participation in court politics
probably led him to believe that he could do more good from where
he stood than by abandoning Nero to his own devices—if he even
had this choice.
In any case, Seneca’s influence over Nero seems to have been
considerably etiolated after the death of Burrus in 62. AccordingA Short Introduction to Stoicism
Stoicism is one of the world’s most influential philosophical move-
ments. Starting from the works and teaching of the three original
heads of the Greek Stoic school—Zeno of Citium (335–263 bce),
ix
seneca and his world
to Tacitus, Seneca tried to retire from his position twice, in 62 and
64. Although Nero refused him on both occasions, Seneca seems
to have largely absented himself from the court after 64. In 65 ce
came the Pisonian conspiracy, a plot to kill Nero and replace him
with the ringleader, C. Calpurnius Piso. Although Seneca’s nephew
Lucan was implicated in this assassination attempt, Seneca himself
was probably innocent. Nonetheless, Nero seized the opportunity to
order his old advisor to kill himself. Seneca cut his own veins, but (so
Tacitus tells us) his thinness and advanced age hindered the flow of
blood. When a dose of poison also failed to kill him, he finally sat in
a hot bath to make the blood flow faster. His wife, Pompeia Paulina,
also tried to commit suicide but was saved on orders from Nero.
Because of his ethical writings, Seneca fared well with the early
Christians—hence the later forging of a fake correspondence with
St. Paul—but already in antiquity he had his fair share of critics,
the main charge arising from the apparent contradiction between
his Stoic teachings on the unimportance of “externals” and his own
amassing of huge wealth. Perhaps for this reason he never gained
the respect accorded the “Roman Socrates,” the Stoic C. Musonius
Rufus, banished by Nero in 65, even though Seneca’s writings have
had far more influence over the centuries. In Seneca’s own lifetime
one P. Suillius attacked him on the grounds that, since Nero’s rise
to power, he had piled up some 300 million sesterces by charging
high interest on loans in Italy and the provinces—though Suillius
himself was no angel and was banished to the Balearic Islands for
being an embezzler and informant. In Seneca’s defense, he seems
to have engaged in ascetic habits throughout his life and despite
his wealth. In fact, his essay On the Happy Life (De vita beata) takes
the position that a philosopher may be rich as long as his wealth
is properly gained and spent and his attitude to it is appropriately
detached. Where Seneca finally ranks in our estimation may rest on
our ability to tolerate the various contradictions posed by the life of
this philosopher in politics.seneca and his world
x
Cleanthes (331–232 bce), and Chrysippus (ca. 280–207 bce)—it be-
came the leading philosophical movement of the ancient Greco-
Roman world, shaping the development of thought well into the
Christian era. Later Greek Stoics Panaetius (ca. 185–109 bce) and
Posidonius (ca. 135–51 bce) modified some features of Stoic doctrine.
Roman thinkers then took up the cause, and Stoicism became the
semiofficial creed of the Roman political and literary world. Cicero
(106–43 bce) does not agree with the Stoics on metaphysical and
epistemological matters but his ethical and political positions lie close
to theirs, and even when he does not agree, he makes a concerted
effort to report their positions sympathetically. Roman Stoics Seneca,
Epictetus (mid-first to early second century ce), Musonius Rufus
(ca. 30–ca. 102 ce), and the emperor Marcus Aurelius (121–80 ce,
emperor 161–80) produced Stoic works of their own (the last three
writing in Greek).
The philosophical achievement of the Greek Stoics, and especially
that of Chrysippus, was enormous: the invention of propositional
logic, the invention of the philosophy of language, unprecedented
achievements in moral psychology, distinction in areas ranging from
metaphysics and epistemology to moral and political philosophy.
Through an accident of history, however, all the works of all the ma-
jor Greek Stoics have been lost, and we must recover their thoughts
through fragments, reports (particularly the lengthy accounts in
Diogenes Laertius’s Lives of the Philosophers, in Cicero, and in Sextus
Empiricus’s skeptical writings since the Stoics are his primary target),
and the works of the Roman thinkers—who often are adjusting Stoic
doctrines to fit Roman reality and probably contributing creative
insights of their own. This also means that we know somewhat less
about Stoic logic or physics than about Stoic ethics, since the Ro-
mans took a particular interest in the practical domain.
The goal of Stoic philosophy, like that of other philosophical
schools of the Hellenistic era, was to give the pupil a flourishing
life free from the forms of distress and moral failure that the Stoics
thought ubiquitous in their societies. Unlike some of their competi-
tor schools, however, they emphasized the need to study all parts of
their threefold system—logic, physics, and ethics—in order to un-
derstand the universe and its interconnections. To the extent that a
Roman such as Cicero believed he could uphold the moral truths ofxi
seneca and his world
Stoicism without a confident belief in a rationally ordered universe,
he held a heretical position (one shared many centuries later by Im-
manuel Kant).
Stoic physics held that the universe is a rationally ordered whole,
and that everything that happens in it happens for the best of rea-
sons. (It is this position, in its Leibnizian incarnation, that is pilloried
in Voltaire’s Candide.) Rejecting traditional anthropomorphic reli-
gion, the Stoics gave the name Zeus to the rational and providential
principle animating the universe as a whole, and they could find even
in the most trivial or distressing events (such as earthquakes and
thunderbolts) signs of the universe’s overall good order. This order
was also a moral order based on the inherent dignity and worth of
the moral capacities of each and every rational being. The Stoics
believed that this order was deterministic: everything happens of ne-
cessity. But they were also “compatibilists,” believing that human free
will was compatible with the truth of determinism. They engaged in
spirited debates with “incompatibilist” Aristotelians, making lasting
contributions to the free will controversy.
Stoic ethics begins from the idea of the boundless worth of the
rational capacity in each and every human being. The Roman Stoics
understood this capacity to be centrally practical and moral. (Thus,
unlike Plato, they did not think that people who had a natural tal-
ent for mathematics were better than people who didn’t, and they
became more and more skeptical that even the study of logic had
much practical value.) They held that all human beings were equal
in worth by virtue of their possession of the precious capacity to
choose and direct their lives, ranking some ends ahead of others. This,
they said, was what distinguished human beings from animals: this
power of selection and rejection. (Unlike most other ancient schools,
they had little concern for the morality of animal treatment, since
they thought that only moral capacity entitled a being to respect
and good treatment.) Children, they said, came into the world like
little animals, with a natural orientation toward self-preservation but
no understanding of true worth. Later, however, a remarkable shift
would take place, already set up by their possession of innate hu-
man nature: they would become able to appreciate the beauty of the
capacity for choice and the way in which moral reason had shaped
the entire universe. This recognition, they said, should lead people toseneca and his world
xii
respect both self and others in an entirely new way. Stoics were seri-
ous about (human) equality: they urged the equal education of both
slaves and women. Epictetus himself was a former slave.
Stoicism looks thus far like an ethical view with radical political
consequences, and so it became during the Enlightenment, when its
distinctive emphases were used to argue in favor of equal political
rights and more nearly equal economic opportunities. However, the
original Stoics maintain a claim of great significance for politics:
moral capacity is the only thing that has intrinsic worth. Money,
honor, power, bodily health, and even the love of friends, children,
and spouse—all these are held to be things that one may reasonably
pursue if nothing impedes (they are called “preferred indifferents”),
but they have no true intrinsic worth. They cannot rightly even be
commensurate with moral worth. So when they do not arrive as one
wishes, it is wrong to be distressed.
This was the context in which the Stoics introduced their famous
doctrine of apatheia, freedom from the passions. Defining the major
emotions or passions as all involving a high valuation of “external
goods,” they argue that the good Stoic will not have any of these dis-
turbances of the personality. Realizing that chance events lie beyond
our control, the Stoic will find it unnecessary to experience grief,
anger, fear, or even hope: all of these are characteristic of a mind
that waits in suspense, awestruck by things indifferent. We can have
a life that truly involves joy (of the right sort) if we appreciate that
the most precious thing of all, and the only truly precious thing, lies
within our control at all times.
Stoics do not think that it is at all easy to get rid of the cultural
errors that are the basis of the rejected passions: thus a Stoic life is a
constant therapeutic process in which mental exercises are devised to
wean the mind from its unwise attachments. Their works depict pro-
cesses of therapy through which the reader may make progress in the
direction of Stoic virtue, and they often engage their reader in just
such a process. Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius describe processes of
repeated meditation; Seneca (in On Anger) describes his own nightly
self-examination. Seneca’s Letters show the role that a wiser teacher
can play in such a therapeutic process, but Seneca evidently does not
think that even he himself is free from erroneous attachments. The
“wise man” is in that sense a distant ideal, not a worldly reality, par-xiii
seneca and his world
ticularly for the Roman Stoics. A large aid in the therapeutic process
is the study of the horrible deformities that societies (including one’s
own) suffer by caring too much about external goods. If one sees the
ugly face of power, honor, and even love clearly enough, this may as-
sist one in making the progress toward true virtue. Thus Seneca’s On
Anger is an example of a genre that we know to have been common
in Stoicism.
Because of their doctrine of value, the Stoics actually do not pro-
pose radical changes in the distribution of worldly goods, as one
might suppose equal regard for the dignity of all human beings
would require. They think that equal respect does require dignified
treatment of each person; thus Seneca urges masters not to beat their
slaves or use them as sexual tools. About the institution of slavery,
however, there is silence, and worse than silence: Seneca argues that
true freedom is internal freedom, so the external sort does not re-
ally matter. Musonius, similarly, advocates respectful treatment for
women, including access to a Stoic education. But as for changes in
the legal arrangements that confined women to a domestic role and
gave males power of life and death over them, he too is silent, arguing
that women will manifest their Stoic virtue in the domestic context.
Some Roman Stoics do appear to have thought that political liberty
was a part of dignity, and thus died supporting republican institu-
tions, but whether this attention to external conditions was con-
sistent with Stoicism remains unclear. (Certainly Cicero’s profound
grief over the loss of political freedom was not the attitude of a Stoic,
any more than was his agonizing grief over his daughter’s death.)
There was also much debate about whether the Stoic norm of
apatheia encouraged people to detach themselves from bad political
events in a way that gave aid and comfort to bad politics. Certainly
Stoics were known to counsel retirement from politics (a theme in
Seneca’s own life as he sought Nero’s permission for retirement, un-
successfully), and they were thought to believe that upheaval was
worse than lawless tyranny. Plutarch reports that Brutus (a Platonist)
questioned potential coconspirators in the assassination of Julius
Caesar by trying to determine whether they accepted that Stoic
norm or believed, with him, that lawless tyranny was worse than
civil strife; only non-Stoics were selected for the group of assassins.
During Nero’s reign, however, several prominent Stoics—includingseneca and his world
xiv
Seneca and his nephew Lucan—joined republican political move-
ments aimed at overthrowing Nero, and lost their lives for their ef-
forts, by politically ordered suicide.
Stoics believed that from the moral point of view, national bound-
aries were as irrelevant as honor, wealth, gender, and birth. They held
that we are, first and foremost, citizens of the universe as a whole.
(The term kosmou polites, citizen of the universe, was apparently first
used by Diogenes the Cynic, but the Stoics took it up and were the
real forefathers of modern cosmopolitanism.) What cosmopolitan-
ism meant in practical terms was unclear, for the reasons already
given—but Cicero thinks, at any rate (in On Duties, a highly Stoic
work), that our common human dignity entails some very strict lim-
its on the reasons for going to war and the sort of conduct that is
permissible in it. He thus adumbrated the basis of the modern law
of war. Cicero denied, however, that our common humanity entailed
any duty to distribute material goods beyond our own borders, thus
displaying the unfortunate capacity of Stoic doctrine to support the
status quo. Cicero’s On Duties has had such an enormous influence on
posterity in this that it is scarcely an exaggeration to blame the Stoics
for the fact that we have well worked-out doctrines of international
law in the area of war and peace, but no well-established understand-
ing of our material duties to one another.
Stoicism’s influence on the development of the entire Western
intellectual tradition cannot be underestimated. Christian thought
owes it a large debt. Clement of Alexandria is just one example of a
Christian thinker steeped in Stoicism; even a thinker such as Augus-
tine, who contests many Stoic theses, finds it natural to begin from
Stoic positions. Even more strikingly, many philosophers of the early
modern era turn to Stoicism for guidance—far more often than they
turn to Aristotle or Plato. Descartes’ ethical ideas are built largely on
Stoic models; Spinoza is steeped in Stoicism at every point; Leib-
niz’s teleology is essentially Stoic; Hugo Grotius bases his ideas of
international morality and law on Stoic models; Adam Smith draws
more from the Stoics than from other ancient schools of thought;
Rousseau’s ideas of education are in essence based on Stoic models;
Kant finds inspiration in the Stoic ideas of human dignity and the
peaceful world community; and the American founders are steeped
in Stoic ideas, including the ideas of equal dignity and cosmopoli-Seneca’s Stoicism
Seneca identifies himself as a Stoic. He declares his allegiance by
repeatedly referring to “our people” (nostri)—the Stoics—in his writ-
ings. Yet he exercises considerable independence in relation to other
Stoics. While he is committed to upholding basic Stoic doctrines,
he recasts them on the basis of his own experience as a Roman and
a wide reading of other philosophers. In this respect he follows a
tradition of Stoic philosophical innovation exemplified most clearly
by Panaetius and Posidonius, who introduced some Platonic and Ar-
istotelian elements while adapting Stoicism to Roman circumstances.
Seneca differs from previous Stoics by welcoming some aspects of
Epicurean philosophy along with other influences.
Seneca is concerned above all with applying Stoic ethical prin-
ciples to his life and to the lives of others like him. The question
that dominates his philosophical writings is how an individual can
achieve a good life. In his eyes, the quest for virtue and happiness is
a heroic endeavor that places the successful person above the assaults
of fortune and on a level with god. To this end, Seneca transforms the
sage into an inspirational figure who can motivate others to become
like him by his gentle humanity and joyful tranquility. Key topics are
how to reconcile adversity with providence, how to free oneself from
passions (particularly anger and grief ), how to face death, how to dis-
xv
seneca and his world
tanism, which also deeply influence the American transcendentalists
Emerson and Thoreau. Because the leading works of Greek Stoicism
had long been lost, all these thinkers were reading the Roman Stoics.
Because many of them read little Greek, they were primarily reading
Cicero and Seneca.
The Stoic influence on the history of literature has also been im-
mense. In the Roman world, all the major poets, like other educated
Romans, were acquainted with Stoic ideas and alluded to them often
in their work. Virgil and Lucan are perhaps particularly significant
in this regard. Later European literary traditions also show marked
traces of Stoic influence—in part via the influence of Roman litera-
ture, and in part through the influence of philosophers in their own
time who were themselves influenced by Stoic thought, but often
also through their own reading of the influential works of Cicero,
Seneca, and Marcus Aurelius.seneca and his world
xvi
engage oneself from political involvement, how to practice poverty
and use wealth, and how to benefit others. All of these endeavors are
viewed within the context of a supreme, perfectly rational and virtu-
ous deity who looks with favor on the efforts of humans to attain the
same condition of virtue. In the field of politics, Seneca argues for
clemency on the part of the supreme ruler, Nero. In human relations,
he pays special attention to friendship and the position of slaves.
Overall, he aims to replace social hierarchies, with their dependence
on fortune, with a moral hierarchy arranged according to proximity
to the goal of being a sage.
Seneca’s own concerns and personality permeate his writings. The
modern reader learns much about the life of an aristocrat in the time
of Claudius and Nero, and much about Seneca’s personal strengths
and weaknesses. At the same time, there is also much in the work
that transcends the immediate concerns of Seneca and his period.
Some topics that resonate especially with a modern audience are his
vision of humans as members of a universal community of mankind,
the respect he demands for slaves, his concern with human emo-
tions, and, in general, his insistence on looking within oneself to find
happiness. What is perhaps less appealing to the modern reader is
the rhetorical elaboration of his message, which features an undeni-
able tendency toward hyperbole. Most of all, Seneca’s own character
strikes many readers as problematic. From his own time on, he was
perceived by some as a hypocrite who was far from practicing what
he preached. Some of Seneca’s writings (in particular, his Consolations
to Polybius and his mother Helvia, and his essay On the Happy Life)
are obviously self-serving. As Seneca himself suggests (Letters 84), he
has transformed the teachings he has culled, in the manner of bees,
into a whole that reflects his own complex character.
The Stoics divided logic into dialectic (short argument) and rhet-
oric (continuous exposition). There is not much to be said on dialectic
in Seneca’s writings except that he shuns it, along with formal logic
in general. Every so often, however, he engages in a satirical display
of fine-grained Stoic-type reasoning. The point is that carrying logi-
cal precision to excess is futile: it does not make a person any bet-
ter. Quibbles of all kinds should be avoided, whether they involve
carrying through a minute line of argument, making overly subtle
verbal distinctions, or indulging in abstruse philological interpreta-xvii
seneca and his world
tion. While making the point, Seneca makes sure the reader knows
he could beat the quibbler at his own game if he wanted to.
We have only sparse details about how the Stoics viewed rhetoric.
What is clear about Seneca, however, is that he used the full panoply
of Roman rhetorical methods to persuade readers of his philosophi-
cal message. His writings are full of vivid examples, stunning meta-
phors, pointed sayings, ringing sound effects. He knows how to vary
his tone, from casual conversation to soaring exhortation and bitter
denunciation. He peoples his text with a varied cast of characters:
the addressee, the implied audience, hypothetical objectors, friends,
opponents, historical figures. He himself hovers over the proceedings
as watchful friend and sometime foe. Following Cleanthes, he inter-
sperses poetry into his prose to impel the reader even more forcefully
toward the task of self-improvement.
Given Seneca’s ethical aims, it is perhaps surprising that he de-
votes a large work, Natural Questions, to physics. Yet the entire work
has an overarching ethical aim. As Seneca insists repeatedly, the mind
is uplifted by venturing beyond narrowly human concerns to survey
the world as a whole. The contemplation of the physical world com-
plements moral action by showing the full context of human action:
we see god in his full glory, caring for human lives as he administers
the world as a whole. In the spirit of Lucretius (who championed a
rival philosophy), Seneca also intersperses ethical messages through-
out his physical inquiries. Thus he emphasizes that humans must
confront natural events, such as death and natural disasters, with
courage and gratitude to god; and he warns against human misuse
of natural resources and the decadence that accompanies progress.
Of all areas of inquiry, physics affords Seneca the greatest scope for
making additions and corrections to Stoic doctrine. He ranges over
the whole history of physical inquiries, from the Presocratics to his
own time, to improve upon the Stoics.
Seneca writes (Letters 45.4) that while he believes “in the judgment
of great men,” he also claims something for his own judgment: previ-
ous philosophers left some things to be investigated by us, which they
might indeed have discovered for themselves if they hadn’t engaged
in useless quibbles. Granted that Seneca shows special investigative
fervor in his cosmological inquiries, his moral teachings too are a
product of his own judgment and innovation. What he contributesseneca and his world
xviii
is a new vision rather than new theories. Using certain strict Stoic
distinctions as a basis, he paints a new picture of the challenges that
humans face and the happiness that awaits those who practice the
correct philosophy. In agreement with Stoic orthodoxy, Seneca is un-
compromising about differentiating between external advantages and
the good, about the need to eradicate the passions, about the perfect
rationality of the wise person, about the identity of god with Fate.
What he adds is a moral fervor, joined by a highly poetic sensibility,
that turns these distinctions into springboards for action.
The Stoic sage was generally viewed by critics as a forbidding
figure, outside the reach of human capabilities and immune to hu-
man feeling. Seneca concedes, or rather emphasizes, that the sage
is indeed rare; he remarks that the sage is like a phoenix, appearing
perhaps every five hundred years (Letters 42.1). As he sees it, the sage’s
exceptional status is not a barrier to improvement; it inspires. Seneca
gives real-life immediacy to the sage by citing the younger Cato, op-
ponent of Julius Caesar, as an example. Cato, indeed, is not just any
sage; Seneca says he is not sure whether Cato might even surpass
him (On Constancy 7.1). In this he is not blurring Stoic distinctions,
but highlighting the indomitable moral strength of a sage. Through
Cato and numerous other examples from the Roman past, Seneca
fuses the Stoic sage with the traditional image of a Roman hero,
thus spurring his Roman readers to fulfill their duties by emulating
both at once.
Below the level of sage, Seneca outlines three stages of moral
progress, demarcated according to our vulnerability to irrational emo-
tions (Letters 75). There is the condition very near to that of being a
sage, in which a person is not yet confident of being able to withstand
irrational emotions (the so-called passions, pathê). Just below it is the
stage in which a person is still capable of lapsing, and at the lowest
level of progress a person can avoid most irrational emotions, but not
all. Below these are the innumerable people who have yet to make
progress. Seneca has nothing to say to them; he wants to avoid them,
lest he be contaminated. What he does allow is that persons who are
still struggling to become good may give way to grief initially; but
he insists that this period must be brief. The Stoics talk “big words,”
he says, when they forbid moans and groans; he’ll adopt a more gentle
tone (Letters 23.4). Still, he insists, these words are “true”; and his aimSenecan Tragedy
From Seneca’s hand there survive eight tragedies (Agamemnon, Thyes-
tes, Oedipus, Medea, Phaedra, Phoenissae, Troades, Hercules Furens),
not including the spurious Octavia and the probably spurious Her-
cules Oetaeus; of the Phoenissae there remain only fragments. These
dramas have undergone many vicissitudes in fortune throughout
the centuries; however, they are no longer criticized as being mere
xix
seneca and his world
is to lead, as much as he can, to the goal of a dispassionate attitude
toward externals. Like everyone, the wise person is prone to initial
shocks—reactions that look momentarily like irrational emotions—
but these are involuntary responses to be succeeded immediately by
the calmness of judgment. Seneca’s sage is kind to others and is filled
with a serene joy that has nothing to do with the ephemeral pleasure
that other people take in externals.
Looking toward Roman heroism, Seneca portrays moral progress
as an arduous struggle, like a military campaign or the uphill storm-
ing of an enemy’s position. The enemy is fortune, viciously attacking
her victim in the form of the most cruel disasters. Her opponent
may succumb, but he will have conquered fortune if he resists to the
end. In reality, the disasters come from other people or simply from
circumstances. Seneca commonly cites death (whether one’s own or
that of a loved one), exile, torture, and illness. His own life is rich
with examples. He goes so far as to advocate adversity as a means of
making moral progress, but he also allows (with a view to his own
wealth) that favorable circumstances are a help to the person who is
still struggling to make progress.
To make progress, a person must not only confront externals but
also, above all, look within oneself. Drawing inspiration from Plato,
Seneca tells us there is a god inside; there is a soul that seeks to free
itself from the dross of the body. Seneca invites the reader to with-
draw into this inner self, so as to both meditate on one’s particular
condition and take flight in the contemplation of god. This with-
drawal can occur in the press of a very active life. But it’s easier when
one is no longer fully caught up in politics, and so Seneca associates
moral withdrawal with his own attempt to withdraw from politics
toward the end of his life. He insists that he will continue to help
others through his philosophical teachings, like other Stoics.seneca and his world
xx
flawed versions of the older Greek dramas in which much of Seneca’s
subject matter had already been treated. While Seneca’s plays were
once mined only for the light they shed on Roman Stoic philosophy,
for examples of rhetorical extravagance, or for the reconstruction
of missing plays by Sophocles and his fellows, the traits that once
marked the dramas as unworthy of critical attention now engage
us in their own right. Indeed, they are the only extant versions of
any Roman tragedy, the writings of other dramatists such as Marcus
Pacuvius (ca. 220–130 bce) and Lucius Accius (ca. 170–86 bce) hav-
ing been lost to posterity. It is thus only Seneca’s version of Roman
drama, translated into English as the Tenne Tragedies in 1581, that so
influenced the tragedians of the Elizabethan era.
Seneca may have turned his hand to writing drama as early as the
reign of Caligula (37–41 ce), although there is no way of determin-
ing exactly when he began. Our first reference to the plays comes
from a famous graffito from the Agamemnon preserved on a wall in
Pompeii, but we can only deduce that this was written before the
eruption of Vesuvius in 79 ce; it is of little actual use in trying to date
the dramas. Stylistic analysis has not provided us with a sure order
of composition, though scholars seem to agree that the Thyestes and
the Phoenissae are late efforts. Certainly we are unable to make claims
about their dating with respect to the Essays and Letters, despite the
very different tones of Seneca’s prose and his poetry—a difference
that led some readers, including the fifth-century churchman and
orator Sidonius Apollinaris and after him Erasmus and Diderot, to
speculate (erroneously) that there might have been two Lucius An-
naeus Senecas at work on them rather than one.
This confusion about the authorship of Seneca’s writing may
seem natural, given the argument that Stoicism fails as a way of life
in the dramas. Whether it fails because its adherents are too weak to
resist the pull of desire or emotion, because Stoicism itself is too dif-
ficult to practice successfully, because the universe is not the locus of
a divine Providence, or because the protagonists are so evil that they
fail to see Providence in action, is open to argument; a metaliterary
view might even suggest that plotlines inherited from mythology
provide the force that condemns a Cassandra or a Polyxena to death
at the hands of a Clytemnestra or a Ulysses, with Seneca taking
advantage of this dramatic fact to suggest the inexorable workingsxxi
seneca and his world
of Fate and the futility of struggle against it. Consider the Thyestes (a
topic often dramatized in the Late Republic, though Seneca’s ver-
sion is the only one we have). We meet the eponymous exile as he
praises the pauper’s life to his children—only the man who drinks
out of earthenware cups can be truly happy and without fear, he
reminds them—but when invited to return to the palace at Argos
by his conniving brother Atreus, the source of his exile, he allows
himself to be lured back after only a token hesitation about giving
up his newfound equanimity. “Sequor,” he says to his son, “I follow
you”; but in following his appetite for the luxurious life he does the
opposite of the good Stoic.
The rest is, well, the stuff of myth. Dressed in royal regalia, Thyes-
tes sits down to enjoy a hearty stew and some fine red wine, but
his satiated belches soon turn into howls of horror as the delighted
Atreus informs him of his dinner’s provenance: the meal is made up
of the dismembered bodies of Thyestes’ own sons. Is there an explicit
ethical or philosophical message here? If we followed the view of
another Stoic, Epictetus (ca. 55–ca. 135 ce), who defined tragedy as
what happens “when chance events befall fools” (Discourses 2.26.31 ),
we might conclude that the story of Thyestes precisely illustrates the
folly of giving in to a desire for power (or haute cuisine). In Seneca’s
treatment, however, such a clear object lesson seems undermined
by a number of factors: the fact that Atreus reigns triumphant as
the drama ends; the undeniable echoes of Stoic exhortation in the
impotent counsels of Atreus’s adviser; and the fragility of civic and
religious values—the hellish scene in which Atreus sacrifices the
children represents precisely a travesty of sacrifice itself, while xenia
(the ancient tradition of hospitality) fares still worse. The adviser or
a nurse mouthing Stoic platitudes without effect is featured in many
of the plays: Phaedra, Clytemnestra, and Medea all have nurses to
counsel them against their paths of action, even though their advice
is invariably distorted and thrown back in their faces. Creon plays a
similar role in the Agamemnon.
Other Senecan protagonists have more lasting doubts than
Thyestes about the value of earthly success. Oedipus asks: “Joys any
man in power?” And unlike his more confident Sophoclean mani-
festation, he feels the answer is clearly no. From the beginning of
the play, the Oedipus provides striking contrasts to its Greek prec-seneca and his world
xxii
edent, whose emphasis on the discovery of identity yields here to
the overwhelming sense of pollution affecting Oedipus. The king,
anxious even as the drama opens, worries that he will not escape
the prophecy of his parricide, and suspects he is responsible for the
plague ravaging Thebes. Despondent, he hopes for immediate death;
his emotional state is far different from that of the character at the
center of Sophocles’ play. Seneca’s version also features Creon’s report
of the long necromantic invocation of Laius’s ghost in a dark grove,
something absent in Sophocles. Even the sense that the characters’
interaction onstage fails to drive the drama makes sense in the con-
text of Seneca’s forbidding and inexorable dramatic world. Causality
and anagnorisis (dramatic recognition) are put aside in favor of the
individual’s helplessness before what awaits him, and the characters’
speeches react to the violence rather than motivate it.
The pollution of the heavens by humans goes against Stoic phys-
ics but finds its place in the plays. The Stoics posited a tensional
relationship between the cosmos and its parts; according to this view,
the pneuma or vital spirit that subtends all matter results in a cos-
mic sympathy of the parts with the whole. “All things are united
together . . . and earthly things feel the influence of heavenly ones,”
as Epictetus (Discourses 1.4.1) puts it. But what we see in the dramas
is a disquieting manifestation of this sympatheia: the idea that the
wickedness of one or a few could disrupt the rational and harmonic
logos of the entire cosmos represents a reversal of the more orthodox
Stoic viewpoint that the world is accessible to understanding and to
reason. Thus we see the universe trembling at Medea’s words, and
the law of heaven in disorder. In the Thyestes, the sun hides its face
in response to Atreus’s crime; in the Phaedra, the chorus notes an
eclipse after Phaedra’s secret passion is unveiled. Horrific portents
presage what is to come in the Troades. In Seneca’s dramas, unlike
in Greek tragedy, there is no role for civic institutions or the city to
intervene in this relationship. The treatment of the gods is similarly
unorthodox. Although Jason calls upon Medea to witness that there
are no gods in the heavens, the very chariot in which she flies away
is evidence of the assistance given her by her divine father. The gods
are there; the problem is that they are unrecognizable.
Seneca’s great antiheroes like Medea and Thyestes are troubling
not only because they often triumph, but because the manner ofxxiii
seneca and his world
their triumph can resemble the goal point of the aspiring Stoic: in
exhorting themselves to take up a certain stance towards the world,
in abandoning familial and social ties, in rejecting the moral order
of the world around them, and in trying to live up to a form of self-
hood they have judged to be “better,” Seneca’s tyrants, just like his
sages, construct a private and autonomous world around themselves
which nothing can penetrate. Not only do they borrow the self-
exhortations and self-reproving of the Stoic’s arsenal, in which the
dialogue conducted with the self suggests a split between a first-order
desiring self and a second-order judging self, but they also adopt
the consideration of what befits or is worthy of them as a guiding
principle—always with a negative outcome.
This leads in turn to a metatheatrical tinge in several of the plays.
In the Medea, for example, Medea seems to look to prior versions of
her own story to discover what exactly is appropriate for her persona,
in the same way that Oedipus, after putting out his eyes, remarks that
“This face befits (an) Oedipus” (Oedipus 1000) or that Atreus says of
his recipe, “This is a crime that befits Thyestes—and befits Atreus”
(Thyestes 271). Such metatheatricality seems to draw upon the concern
of the traditional Roman elite to perform exemplary actions for an
approving audience, to generate one’s ethical exemplarity by making
sure that spectators for it exist.
And spectators do exist—we, the theater audience or the recita-
tion audience. Scholars have long debated the question of whether
Seneca’s dramas were staged in antiquity. It is possible, as argued by
the nineteenth-century German scholar Friedrich Leo, the tragedies
were written for recitation only; inter alia, it would be unusual (but
not impossible) to represent animal sacrifice and murder on stage.
The question is unresolvable, but whether the original audiences were
in the theater or in the recitation room, they shared with us the full
knowledge of how the story would turn out, and in this they un-
comfortably resembled some of the plotting antiheroes themselves.
Indeed, our pleasure in watching Senecan tragedy unfold might seem
to assimilate us to the pleasure these characters take in inflicting
suffering on one another. In a famous line from the Troades, the mes-
senger who brings news of Astyanax’s murder reports of the scene of
his death—which he has already compared to a theater—that “The
greater part of the fickle crowd abhors the crime—and watches it”(1128–29). Here, in the tension between sadistic voyeurism and hor-
ror at what the drama unfolds, we can recognize the uncomfortable
position of the spectator of Seneca’s despairing plays.
xxiv
seneca and his world
Senecan Drama after the Classical Period
The fortunes of Senecan drama have crested twice: once during the
Elizabethan period, and again in our own day. Although Seneca him-
self never refers to his tragedies, they were known in antiquity at
least until Boethius (ca. 480–524 ce), whose Consolation of Philosophy
draws on the themes of Seneca’s choral odes. The dramas then largely
dropped from sight, to reemerge in 1300 in a popular edition and
commentary by Nicholas Trevet, a Dominican scholar at Oxford.
Trevet’s work was followed by vernacular translations in Spain, Italy,
and France over the next two centuries. In Italy, an early imitator was
Albertino Mussato (1261–1329), who wrote his tragic drama Ecerinis
to alert his fellow Paduans to the danger presented by the tyrant
of Verona. In England, the Jesuit priest and poet Jasper Heywood
(1535–1598) produced translations of three of the plays; these were
followed by Thomas Newton’s Seneca His Tenne Tragedies Translated
into English in 1581—of which one tragedy was Newton’s own The-
bais. The dramas were considered to be no mere pale shadow of their
Greek predecessors: Petrarch, Salutati, and Scaliger all held Seneca
inferior to none on the classical stage. In Scaliger’s influential treatise
on poetry, the Poetices libri septem (1561), he ranks Seneca as the equal
of the Greek dramatists in solemnity and superior to Euripides in
elegance and polish (6.6).
The Elizabethan playwrights in particular took up Seneca as
a model for translation or imitation. T. S. Eliot claimed that “No
author exercised a wider or deeper influence upon the Elizabethan
mind or upon the Elizabethan form of tragedy than did Seneca,” and
the consensus is that he was right. It is perhaps little wonder that
Seneca appealed to an age in which tragedy was seen as the correct
vehicle for the representation of “haughtinesse, arrogancy, ambition,
pride, iniury, anger, wrath, envy, hatred, contention, warre, murther,
cruelty, rapine, incest, rovings, depredations, piracyes, spoyles, robber-
ies, rebellions, treasons, killings, hewing, stabbing, dagger-drawing,
fighting, butchery, treachery, villainy, etc., and all kind of heroyicke
evils whatsoever” ( John Greene, A Refutation of the Apology for Ac-xxv
seneca and his world
tors, 1615, p.56). Kyd, Marlowe, Marston, and Shakespeare all read
Seneca in Latin at school, and much of their drama shows his in-
fluence in one form or another. The itinerant players at Elsinore in
Shakespeare’s Hamlet famously opine that “Seneca cannot be too
heavy nor Plautus too light” (2.2.400–401), but it is Shakespeare’s
Titus Andronicus that shows the greatest Senecan influence with its
taste for revenge, rape, decapitation, human cookery, and insanity.
Richard III and Macbeth, on the other hand, exemplify the presence
of unrestrained, brooding ambition in the power-hungry protago-
nist. Similarly, in such plays as Thomas Kyd’s The Spanish Tragedy
and John Marston’s Antonio’s Revenge we see the influence of such
Senecan fixtures as ghosts speaking from beyond the grave, graphic
violence, obsession with revenge, and even structural features such as
choruses, use of stichomythia, and division into five acts.
The bleak content of the dramas was often tied to the notion of a
moral lesson. Already Trevet’s preface to the Thyestes argued that the
play taught the correction of morals by example, as well as simply
offering the audience enjoyment. The Jesuit Martín Antonio Delrio
(1551–1608) defended the use of Roman drama in a Christian educa-
tion by suggesting that it provided a masked instruction in wisdom,
as did Mussato before him. Nonetheless, after the middle of the
seventeenth century Seneca’s drama fell largely into disrepute. The
Restoration poet John Dryden (1631–1700) took the opportunity in
the preface to his own Oedipus to criticize both Seneca’s and Cor-
neille’s versions; of the former, he wrote that “Seneca [ . . . ] is always
running after pompous expression, pointed sentences, and Philo-
sophical notions, more proper for the Study than the Stage.” The
French dramatist Jean Racine (1639–1699) used Seneca as a model
for his Phèdre, but at the same time claimed that his main debt was
to Euripides. Not surprisingly, the Romantics did not find much
to like in Seneca. Recently, however, an efflorescence of interest in
both the literary and the performance aspects of Senecan drama
has produced new editions, scholarly monographs, and the staging
of some of the plays. Noteworthy here are Sarah Kane’s adaptation
Phaedra’s Love, performed in New York in May 1996; Michael Elliot
Rutenberg’s May 2005 dramatization of a post-holocaust Oedipus at
Haifa University in Israel; and a 2007 Joanne Akalaitis production
of the Thyestes at the Court Theater in Chicago.seneca and his world
xxvi
A note on the translations: they are designed to be faithful to
the Latin while reading idiomatically in English. The focus is on
high standards of accuracy, clarity, and style in both the prose and
the poetry. As such, the translations are intended to provide a basis
for interpretive work rather than to convey personal interpretations.
They eschew terminology that would imply a Judeo-Christian moral
framework (e.g., “sin”). Where needed, notes have been supplied to
explain proper names in mythology and geography.
For further information
On Seneca’s life: Miriam T. Griffin, Seneca: A Philosopher in Politics
(Oxford: 1976) and Paul Veyne, Seneca: The Life of a Stoic, translated
from the French by David Sullivan (New York: 2003). On his phil-
osophical thought: Brad Inwood, Seneca: Stoic Philosophy at Rome
(Oxford: 2005), and Shadi Bartsch and David Wray, Seneca and the
Self (Cambridge: 2009). On the dramas: A. J. Boyle, Tragic Seneca:
An Essay in the Theatrical Tradition (New York and London: 1997);
C. A. J. Littlewood, Self-Representation and Illusion in Senecan Trag-
edy (Oxford: 2004); and Thomas G. Rosenmeyer, Senecan Drama
and Stoic Cosmology (Berkeley: 1989). On Seneca and Shakespeare:
Robert S. Miola, Shakespeare and Classical Tragedy: The Influence of
Seneca (Oxford: 1992) and Henry B. Charlton, The Senecan Tradition
in Renaissance Tragedy (Manchester: 1946).