Abbreviations
For the titles of works by Greek and Roman authors I use the abbre-
viations given in S. Hornblower and A. Spawforth, eds., The Oxford
Classical Dictionary, 3rd ed. revised (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2003), xxix–liv. I have cited early Greek philosophers according to the
standard numbering system of Hermann Diels and Walther Kranz.
B. Inwood, ed. The Cambridge Companion to the Stoics. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
DK H. Diels and W. Kranz. Fragmente der Vorsokratiker.
6th ed. 3 vols. Zurich: Weidmann, 1951–52.
FGH F. Jacoby. Die Fragmente der griechischen Historiker. Berlin:
Weidmann, 1923–.
FHG C. Müller. Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum. 4 vols. Paris:
Ambrosio Firmin-Didot, 1841–70.
LS
A. A. Long and D. N. Sedley. The Hellenistic Philosophers.
Vol. 1. Translations of the Principal Sources, with Philosophical
Commentary. Vol. 2. Greek and Latin Texts with Notes and
Bibliography. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987.
RE
A. Pauly, G. Wissowa, and W. Kroll, eds. Real-Encyclopädie
der classischen Altertumswissenschaft. Stuttgart: Metzler,
1894–1978.
SVF J. von Arnim. Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta. 4 vols. Leipzig:
Teubner, 1903–24; repr. Stuttgart: Teubner, 1964.
CCS
xxviiTranslator’s Introduction
The Structure and Content of the Natural Questions
Natural Questions is the traditional English translation of the Latin
title Naturales Quaestiones. A better translation might be Natural In-
quiries or Inquiries into Nature, but I use the traditional title here. This
is the first translation to present the eight books of the Natural Ques-
tions in what is now widely agreed to have been the order in which
Seneca originally wrote them. Analysis of the medieval manuscript
tradition, in which the books are presented in various orders and
numerations, and of the passages in the work that have a bearing on
the book order, indicates that Seneca wrote the books in the order
3, 4a, 4b, 5, 6, 7, 1, 2, whereas in many manuscripts, and in all printed
editions and earlier translations, books 1 and 2 come at the start.1
This translation follows the original order, but I use the traditional
numeration of the books to facilitate reference to other translations,
editions, and scholarly literature.2 The individual books are for the
most part self-contained, with few clear cross-references between
books (only between 3 and 4a, 5 and 6, and 1 and 7).3
The title Natural Questions suggests investigations of nature quite
generally, and the opening of the work announces Seneca’s intention
to “traverse the world” and “investigate nature” without restriction
(3.praef.1, 18). But the work as we have it covers a very specific range
of topics. There is no extended treatment of cosmology, or astronomy,
or biology, for example, all of which might be expected in a work on
nature (they are treated in the elder Pliny’s Natural History, written
not many years after Seneca’s death). We may summarize the top-
ics covered by the Natural Questions as follows (for a more detailed
analysis of the contents of each book see below):
Book 3
Book 4a
Book 4b
Book 5
Book 6
Rivers
The Nile River
Clouds, rain,4 hail, snow
Winds
Earthquakes
1Comets
Meteors, rainbows, and other optical
meteorological phenomena
Lightning and thunder
2Book 2
t r a n sl at or’s i n t r o d u c t io n
Book 7
Book 1
We know that parts of books 4a and 4b have been lost (see n. 1).
Nothing at the end of book 2 expressly indicates that it is the con-
clusion of the work, so it is possible that Seneca wrote further books
that have not survived, or that he intended to write more books but
left the work unfinished at his death; however, we have no evidence
of this.
Ancient Meteorology
Today’s reader will be struck by the range of modern disciplines
that Seneca touches on—geography, meteorology, seismology, and
astronomy—but the ancient reader would have seen that his work
deals with what the Greeks called meteorologia, “meteorology.” An-
cient meteorology covered a much broader field than its modern
counterpart. So far as we know, Aristotle had first identified meteo-
rology as a separate branch of knowledge, distinct from astronomy, in
his Meteorologica. In this work he deals with events occurring in the
atmosphere, including clouds, rain, snow, hail, thunder and lighting,
rainbows, and other optical phenomena, all of them topics covered
in modern meteorology and meteorological optics; but he also dis-
cusses meteors and comets, which, he argues, originate and persist in
the atmosphere (though today we know that comets orbit in space,
and meteors appear when objects enter the earth’s atmosphere from
space); and he also includes the sea, rivers, and earthquakes, because,
even though they do not occur in the atmosphere, in his view they are
caused by the same physical forces that operate in the atmosphere.
The Natural Questions and Stoic Physics
Although the topics that are covered in detail in the Natural Ques-
tions fall within the scope of ancient meteorology, the title suggests
investigations of nature quite generally. Furthermore, throughout the
work Seneca’s discussions are conducted within the framework of
Stoic physics. He assumes that the world is controlled by a rational
deity, who can be identified with reason, nature, providence, and fateSeneca’s Knowledge of Earlier Meteorological Writing
Nevertheless, each of the surviving books of the Natural Questions
is devoted to a problem or problems that fell within the scope of
ancient meteorology. Meteorological phenomena had been discussed
by philosophers before Aristotle, even if they did not demarcate
meteorology as a separate discipline. None of their works survives
3
tr a nsl ator’s introduc tion
(see, e.g., 2.45).5 There are no chance or random events in the world,
for everything is controlled by the divinely ordained chain of cause
and effect (see, e.g., 1.praef.14; 2.45.2). Everything, including god, is
corporeal, and matter is continuous, with no void within the world.
The whole world is composed of the four elements—earth, water, air,
and fire—which are constantly interacting and changing into one an-
other. But also—and this is a distinctively Stoic doctrine—the energy
that gives everything its coherence and its vitality, its ability to move
and change, comes from what in Greek is called pneuma, in Latin
spiritus, which is here translated as “breath.”6 “Breath” in Stoicism is
not another element, but a combination of air and fire, and it pos-
sesses “tension,” which gives coherence and dynamism to everything
in the world, animate or inanimate, as Seneca explains in detail in
2.6–11.7 The attribution of breath to inanimate objects, and also to
the whole cosmos, is one aspect of the correspondences that exist be-
tween microcosm and macrocosm, between the human body, and the
body of the earth, and the body of the world—correspondences that
Seneca exploits (see, e.g., 3.15; 6.14; 1.praef.15). In fact in Stoicism the
earth is a living creature, and the whole world is a living creature with
a soul.8 Seneca also presupposes the main tenets of Stoic ethics, that
the best life is one lived according to nature, or reason, or virtue.
Such doctrines are rarely discussed at length, except in the last
two books, for in the preface to book 1 he speaks about Stoic theol-
ogy, and in book 2 he discusses the nature of air and breath (2.2–11)
and problems connected with divination (2.32–51). In addition, he
discusses a number of specific ethical issues throughout the work, all
of them hinging on right and wrong attitudes to nature (see further
below). The constant presence of Stoic physics in the background
and these extended discussions of specific issues give substance to his
claim that this is a work about nature generally, not just a textbook
on meteorology.t r a n sl at or’s i n t r o d u c t io n
4
complete, but there are numerous reports of their ideas from later
writers, including Seneca himself. Aristotle had many successors in
the field. His pupil Theophrastus was one of the earliest of them. His
Greek work on meteorology did not survive, but in the twentieth
century extensive Syriac and Arabic versions were discovered. Epi-
curus, the founder of the Epicurean school, wrote on the subject, and
a substantial summary of his views survives. Posidonius, the leading
Stoic philosopher of the first century BCE also wrote on meteorol-
ogy. In Latin, the philosophical poem of Lucretius contains detailed
discussions of meteorological phenomena, following Epicurus in its
ideas though not in its poetic format. Seneca’s work is the longest
and most detailed meteorological work surviving from the period
after Aristotle. Not long after Seneca, Pliny the Elder dealt with
meteorological topics in book 2 of his surviving Natural History, and
from late antiquity there survive Greek commentaries on Aristotle’s
Meteorology, as well as other briefer treatments in Greek.9
Seneca’s predecessors regularly appear by name in his work, but
they do not all get the same amount of coverage. The Presocratics
feature fairly frequently, though no single philosopher appears more
than half a dozen times. Aristotle is mentioned quite often, and his
followers Theophrastus and Strato a few times. The Epicureans, how-
ever, are rarely on view: Epicurus is mentioned only once (6.20.5),
and Lucretius is quoted once without being named (4b.3.4). How-
ever, the atomic theory of matter is criticized in some detail (2.6–7),
and there is passing criticism of the view that the whole world is the
product of chance (1.praef.15), but all without the Epicureans needing
to be named. There is an interesting contrast with Seneca’s Letters,
where the moral teachings of Epicurus, or at least carefully selected
aspects of them that are acceptable to Seneca, receive considerable
prominence in the earlier part of the collection. But despite the rarity
of explicit references to Epicurus or Lucretius, the work shares im-
portant characteristics with Lucretius’s poem: like Lucretius, Seneca
offers a rational explanation of events that were often attributed to
the action of malevolent or arbitrary gods, and he offers freedom
from fear of the frightening aspects of nature (see further discus-
sion below). But Seneca is a Stoic, and it is possible to see his work,
with its vision of the world under the control of a rational deity, not5
tr a nsl ator’s introduc tion
governed by blind chance, as, among other things, a Stoic riposte to
Lucretius’s Epicurean vision of the world.
As we have seen in the preceding section, Seneca’s worldview is
Stoic. When it comes to the details of meteorological theory, Posi-
donius receives a number of mentions, and his pupil Asclepiodotus
a few; but of the earlier Stoics, only Zeno is mentioned, just once,
by name (7.19.1). On the other hand, there are some references to the
Stoics collectively, though they are always referred to as “our people”
(nostri), not “Stoics.” Sometimes people are mentioned who are not
known to have belonged to the main philosophical schools, and in
book 7 in particular considerable prominence is given to three men
who are virtually unknown outside the writings of Seneca, Apol-
lonius of Myndus, Artemidorus, and Epigenes.
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries there was
much debate about the sources of the Natural Questions: which ear-
lier works did Seneca rely on? The answer then given was often that
he relied heavily on a single lost Greek work on meteorology, which
was either by Posidonius or was a later work summarizing Posido-
nius’s ideas. In the later twentieth century, scholars were readier to
allow that Seneca’s reading on the subject was most probably broader,
and his own acquaintance with the field rather more assured, than
the earlier scholars had allowed, and that there was no need to think
he was following a single source closely. Definitive conclusions will
never be reached because of the loss of most of the original works
of writers to whom Seneca referred. In the case of Aristotle, we are
in the unique position of being able to set the original work along-
side Seneca’s reports of his ideas, yet even so scholars reach different
conclusions. It is clear that Seneca often gives a summary version of
a longer treatment by Aristotle, and that the summaries are often
loose, sometimes inadequate or distorted. On the other hand, oc-
casionally Seneca’s Latin seems to follow Aristotle’s wording pretty
closely. These characteristics are largely agreed upon, but scholars
disagree about how to explain them: for some, they demonstrate that
Seneca could not have read Aristotle’s original text but must have
read a later report of his views; but others allow that Seneca may
well have had access to a text of Aristotle, but did not use and report
it as carefully as a modern scholar would be expected to. Similart r a n sl at or’s i n t r o d u c t io n
6
problems arise with other Latin writers. We know that this was not
Seneca’s first work on a meteorological topic, for he refers to a work
on earthquakes that he had written in his early years (6.4.2), and
we know from elsewhere of other works on scientific topics that do
not survive. So he is likely to have had a good general knowledge of
ancient science, though naturally he is likely to have read or reread
particular works when writing the Natural Questions.10
Critical Doxography
Seneca includes a lot of information about the views of earlier writ-
ers and engages critically with their ideas. Writers on meteorology
did not always do this. Epicurus and Lucretius never, or hardly ever,
discussed the ideas of their predecessors on meteorology. On the
other hand there were works—called doxographical works—that did
no more than offer bald summaries of the views of a range of earlier
writers. But Seneca engages in critical doxography, not just describ-
ing, but also criticizing the ideas of his predecessors, as part of the
process of arriving at his own views. The method goes back to Aris-
totle, and had very likely been used by Posidonius as well.11 Argument
about rival explanations is vital to Seneca’s work. He is not, however,
writing a history of the subject: the order in which philosophers
appear is not chronological but usually follows the dynamics of the
argument; and theories are regularly presented anonymously. Book 6
is a good example, where the discussion of the causes of earthquakes
begins at 6.5.1 by saying that people have explained earthquakes as
caused by water, or fire, or earth, or air, or more than one of these, or
all of them. The discussion that follows keeps to that order of topics,
with the holders of particular views sometimes being named, but
not always.
Another characteristic of Seneca’s argumentative exposition is
that he sometimes keeps his cards to his chest and reveals his own
opinion only at a later stage of the book. It can be disconcerting
when, early on, he criticizes a view that he will later advocate himself,
or defends a view that he will later repudiate. For example, in book 7
on comets, the view of Apollonius of Myndus that comets are planets
is introduced at 7.4.1, described in more detail in 7.17, and then criti-
cized in 7.18. But the view that Seneca later advocates in 7.24–27 has
strong similarities to that of Apollonius, and he there answers someMethodology
Should the Natural Questions be described as scientific? Should any
work of ancient meteorology be described in that way? Few of the
explanations of phenomena accepted by Seneca bear much resem-
blance to the modern scientific explanations. The main exception
is in book 7 on comets, where he rejects the well-entrenched view
of Aristotle and Posidonius, among others, that they are temporary
atmospheric phenomena, and argues that they are celestial bodies
like planets, though their orbits are as yet not understood. Signifi-
cantly, it is in the book that comes closest to astronomy that Seneca
is most accurate, for in the case of comets, naked-eye observation
could achieve some progress. But with most of the topics Seneca
discusses, naked-eye observation was never going to achieve much.
True, if expeditions had succeeded in reaching the sources of the Blue
and White Nile and studied the climate there, the causes of the Nile’s
flooding could have been better understood. But there was no way
that observation of thunderclouds from the ground would reveal the
electrical properties of lightning, or that observation of the visible
effects of earthquakes would lead directly to plate tectonics. Even
the most basic concepts of modern meteorology were lacking, or ex-
tremely vague and totally unquantifiable. Notions of air pressure were
confined to the idea of the pressure exerted by air or wind in motion,
which is rather different from the modern meteorologist’s under-
standing of air pressure; and there were no barometers. When talking
about heat and cold, ancient writers did not distinguish as a mod-
ern physicist would between heat energy and temperature, and there
were no objective means of measuring temperature. As noted above,
Seneca, like most ancient scientific writers, takes for granted the
theory of four elements—fire, air, water, earth. They can all change
into each other, but there are no precise rules governing when and
how they can do so, and no experiments to test hypotheses about how
7
tr a nsl ator’s introduc tion
of the objections he had earlier made to Apollonius’s theory. On the
other hand, in 7.21.2–4 he defends the Stoic view of comets against
various objections, but then at 7.22.1 tells us that he rejects that view.
He is clearly trying to tease out the strengths and weaknesses of each
theory with a degree of impartiality, instead of making his own views
clear at the outset.t r a n sl at or’s i n t r o d u c t io n
8
such changes occur. Nevertheless, Seneca and other ancient writers
on meteorology were performing a service to later science in their
restless exploration of the linguistic and logical possibilities of key
terms like element, hot, cold, dense, and rarefied by laying conceptual
groundwork for a time in the distant future when experiments could
clarify such concepts and measure such properties.
On the other hand, what Seneca does is akin to science in that
he seeks explanations in purely physical terms, without any divine
intervention at the local level (and at the cosmic level, divine activity
follows its own regular laws; e.g., see 1.praef.3). He employs obser-
vation in his arguments and sometimes recognizes the necessity of
collecting data over a long period of time (7.3.1). And, as we shall see,
he recognizes that progress comes only from a painstakingly long,
collaborative effort by generations of scholars.
At the heart of Seneca’s arguments and explanations lies anal-
ogy. The use of analogy in meteorology had a long history, going
back to the Presocratics. Seneca does not merely use analogy, but is
self-conscious and reflective about it, recognizing that it yields only
a possible explanation, not a certain one (see 2.22–23). By contrast,
geometry can give “arguments that are not just persuasive but com-
pelling” about the formation of the rainbow (1.4.1). Seneca does not
give us these geometrical proofs—he sticks to less taxing types of
argument—but the assumption is that geometry can give a level of
proof that is not available to the arguments and analogies that Seneca
normally uses, which are persuasive rather than compelling.
Debate is a primary vehicle of persuasion, and much of the argu-
ment of the Natural Questions takes the form of debate with earlier
thinkers and earlier theories. A good example of sustained debate
is the discussion of the rainbow in 1.3–8. The debates in the Natural
Questions repeatedly come back to the evidence of the senses and
of experience. There are dozens of references to what can be seen
and occasional references to what can be heard, smelled, tasted, and
touched (e.g., 3.2; 3.24–25; 2.21.2; 2.27). Yet at the same time Seneca
regularly stresses the unreliability of the senses. It is not just that
different people report differently on the same phenomenon (see
7.11.3; 1.3.7–8), or that some things are too small to be seen at all (4b.9;
6.24.1; 7.30.4), but in some circumstances we are all equally prone to
be misled by what we can see. He refers to well-known optical illu-The Community of Scholars
Seneca’s practice exemplifies his conviction that progress can best
be made by critical dialogue with the thinkers of the past. He has
a clear vision of meteorology as a collaborative effort by numerous
investigators over many centuries, a process that will continue far
into the future. Progress depends on the patient collection of infor-
mation about the phenomena in question and on critical probing of
the theories of one’s predecessors. He warns against dismissing the
theories of the earliest thinkers as crude or silly, because they took the
essential first steps, and later thinkers were building on their efforts
(6.5.2–3). And just as their ideas seemed antiquated by Seneca’s day,
so Seneca is sure that his ideas will seem just as antiquated to people
far in the future (7.25.4–7; 7.30.5).12 Here is an implicit signal to us
later readers to be as critical of his ideas as he is of the ideas of his
predecessors.
In effect Seneca pictures a community of scholars stretching
across time and across national and philosophical boundaries. Most
of the thinkers he mentions are Greeks, but there are occasionally
Egyptians, Chaldaeans, and Romans too, and all are treated on the
merits of their ideas. We have already seen the range of philosophers
he refers to, and he shows no favoritism to his own Stoic school; in
fact some of his most stinging criticism targets fellow Stoics (e.g.,
4b.3.1–2; 4b.6–7). But although he looks far into the past and into the
future, there is little trace in the work of a contemporary intellectual
context. Occasionally he does give information from contemporary
informants: Balbillus, prefect of Egypt, provides a story about a battle
between crocodiles and dolphins (4a.2.13–15); we hear about the ex-
periences of an unnamed man during the recent Campanian earth-
quake (6.31.3); and some scholars have argued that the Apollonius
9
tr a nsl ator’s introduc tion
sions (1.3.9–10; 1.6.5; 1.14.3; 1.17.1) and to the weakness of our sight and
other senses (3.25.1; 3.28.5; 1.15.6–8). The remedy for the weaknesses of
our senses is to use our reason as well, a lesson that Seneca sometimes
spells out (6.3.2; 6.7.5) and constantly exemplifies in the ceaseless
probing of his arguments, which display reason in action. In addition,
there are some things that are in principle inaccessible to our senses
and available only to reason, notably knowledge of god, which can be
achieved through study of the natural world (7.30.3; 1.praef.).t r a n sl at or’s i n t r o d u c t io n
10
of Myndus who appears in Book 7 was a contemporary of Seneca’s.
But this is not certain, and at the end of the book we find Seneca
lamenting the current neglect of philosophy in a society that is more
interested in dancers and mime-actors (7.31–32).
The Contemporary Context
The Natural Questions can be firmly dated to the early 60s CE. Refer-
ences to Nero as emperor (see below) show that the Natural Ques-
tions was written after Nero’s accession (54 CE), and references to a
recent earthquake and comet in books 6 and 7 help date the book
to the early 60s, in the last years of Seneca’s life.13 Tacitus describes
how Seneca effectively withdrew from Nero’s court in 62, after the
death of Burrus (Ann. 14.52–56). We cannot be certain that he began
the Natural Questions after, rather than before, this withdrawal, but
the preface to book 3, with its talk of his old age, of “having used
up my years in fruitless pursuits” and “the losses of a misspent life,”
seems obliquely to express regrets about his political career. At vari-
ous points he seems to distance himself from the Roman political
world—notably in his denunciation of writing history (3.praef.5–6)
and in his disparagement of military conquests and imperial power
(3.praef.9–10; 5.18.12; 1.praef.8–10)—all within the context of his ap-
peal to the reader to seek understanding of the entire cosmos in all
its splendor, compared to which the earth and earthly achievements
are insignificant (1.praef ).
But at the same time, Seneca cannot escape the gravitational pull
of his Roman context. One contemporary who features prominently
in the work is its dedicatee, Lucilius, who is also the dedicatee of the
dialogue On Providence (Dial. 1) and of the Letters. In Letter 79 Sen-
eca asks him to investigate certain questions about Charybdis and
Etna, but there is no suggestion in the Natural Questions that Lucilius
is interested in pursuing scientific questions for himself. What we do
hear about is his past career and his current post, a procuratorship in
Sicily; yet Seneca’s message in the preface to book 4a is that Lucilius
must resist the dangers of his social and political environment, where
flattery is rife, and he offers the discussion of the Nile as a means of
drawing him away from Sicily.
Another contemporary who is mentioned more than once is the
emperor Nero. A line of his poetry is quoted approvingly (1.5.6), and11
tr a nsl ator’s introduc tion
his principate is referred to in passing as “most fortunate” (7.21.3).
In book 6 he appears as a sponsor of geographical and scientific in-
vestigation when Seneca says that he sent two centurions to search
for the sources of the Nile (6.8.3–5). They remained unknown to the
Greeks and Romans, which hampered attempts to explain the river’s
annual flooding, the topic of book 4a. Other ancient writers speak
of military motives for Nero’s expedition, but there is no reason to
doubt that geographical exploration was one motive. In the passage
Seneca describes Nero as “[a] great lover of truth.” This is sometimes
taken to be conventional flattery, even ironic, but it may well be that
Nero, like other ancient rulers, took steps to promote various kinds
of intellectual activity, though any such efforts hardly register in the
hostile ancient historical tradition.14
In Rome, natural events could assume immense political sig-
nificance. The appearance of a comet in 60 CE was one example,
for comets were widely believed to portend the death of a ruler. It
was rumored that Nero would be succeeded by Rubellius Plautus, so
Nero asked him to move to Asia to quell the rumors (Ann. 14.22).
Seneca refers to this comet as one that “did away with the ill repute of
comets” (7.17.2). But there were serious philosophical issues at stake:
the Natural Questions refers to the debate about whether comets,
ominous lightning strikes, and so on are divinely sent signs indicating
the displeasure of the gods or ordinary natural events with the same
sorts of causes as other events (see, e.g., 2.32.2–4). Seneca strongly
advocates the second view. But we know that other views about com-
ets were available in Rome in the 60s, so that Seneca’s treatment of
the topic, which resolutely treats them as ordinary—and in principle
predictable—natural phenomena, has political implications.
More generally, much of the Natural Questions is about phenom-
ena that featured prominently in the Roman religious system, with
its careful attention to signs and omens sent by the gods. Lightning
that caused death or destruction, earthquakes, and unfamiliar bright
objects in the sky, as well as comets, were traditionally regarded as
portents or prodigies, that is, as signs of the gods’ displeasure, and
there were traditional forms of religious expiation. But Seneca puts
forward natural explanations of these events, just as Lucretius had
done before him from an Epicurean standpoint. By contrast, it may
seem that in book 2 Seneca does adopt the traditional religious ap-t r a n sl at or’s i n t r o d u c t io n
12
proach, when he has a long discussion of divination from thunder
and lightning (2.32–51). But throughout this discussion he follows the
orthodox Stoic line that while such phenomena can indeed predict
future events, this is not because any god directly causes the phenom-
enon; rather, the predictive power is the result of a chain of natural
cause and effect linking the phenomenon and the consequence. One
might say that, for Seneca and the Stoics, divination from lightning
was in principle no different from, and just as scientific as, weather
forecasting; though they acknowledged that they were both as yet
very inexact sciences.15
The Ethical and Religious Context of Science
The traditional Roman ways of dealing with portents and prodi-
gies can be seen, at least in part, as a means of handling the public
anxiety that was often occasioned by unfamiliar events such as the
appearance of a comet or damage to a temple by lightning. One may
therefore see Seneca as offering a philosophical alternative to the
traditional religious means of handling such anxieties. At certain
points in the Natural Questions he directly addresses the fears that
people have of earthquakes or lightning, and in this he follows a
long philosophical tradition. Epicurus had gone so far as to say that
one needs to study the physics of the world only in order to remove
the fear of death and the fear of the gods; Lucretius follows him in
preaching freedom from fear; and that is one of the motifs running
through Seneca’s work.
Scholars have debated whether the ethical lessons derived from
science are the main motivation of the Natural Questions. The debate
starts from the fact that, though the work is on meteorology, the
majority of the books contain prefaces, conclusions, or digressions on
topics that ostensibly have nothing to do with meteorology. Some of
these, as just mentioned, tackle human fear of unfamiliar phenomena
(6.32; 2.59). Some tackle then fashionable forms of luxurious and
decadent living that abuse the gifts provided by nature: the craze for
cooling drinks with snow (4b.13); the use of winds for sea-travel not
to increase knowledge but to wage war (5.18); the use of mirrors by
a man whose sexual antics were notorious (1.16); and the contempo-
rary insistence on watching fish die at the dinner table before eating
them (3.18). Some tackle broader scientific and philosophical issuesMastery of the World
The preface to book 1 outlines Seneca’s ideal of the virtuous person
who relies not only on sight but on the proper use of reason and thus
attains to knowledge of god and of the entire world. Hostius Quadra,
whom Seneca castigates at the end of the book for performing his
versatile sexual acts surrounded by magnifying mirrors, is the antith-
esis of this virtuous person; among other faults, he is too attached to
what his eyes can see (1.16.3–4). So too are the diners who demand
to watch a fish dying on the table before they will eat it (3.18.7).
Such people, in Seneca’s descriptions, are just as single-minded as the
philosopher, but they never go beyond what their eyes can tell them.
Then there are the people whom Philip of Macedon sent under-
ground to explore old mine workings and see if there was anything
left: they may be investigating parts of the physical world that the
13
tr a nsl ator’s introduc tion
(7.30–32; 1.praef; 2.1–10). These sections of the work have been viewed
in different ways: as interludes extraneous to the main scientific ma-
terial, more accessible and entertaining than the technical arguments,
and used like sugar to help the scientific medicine go down; or as
the real point of the work, with the scientific sections there only to
support the moral and religious inferences. But either of these views
taken to extremes is unnecessarily reductive.
Sometimes within the work itself voices are raised questioning
the value of technical scientific discussions, and sometimes Seneca
stresses that scientific understanding will produce moral benefit (e.g.,
3.praef.18; 4b.13.1; 6.4.2; 6.32.1; 2.59.2). Here he is following a strong
philosophical tradition that sees ethics as ultimately more important
for human beings than physics, and he is also addressing traditional
Roman doubts about the usefulness of theoretical philosophy. But
such passages should not be taken as a key to unlocking the whole
structure and purpose of the Natural Questions, as though the only
reason for all this scientific discussion is the moral lessons to be
drawn from it. It is clear enough that for Seneca there are other
motivations: apart from the intrinsic interest of the natural world,
he repeats the theme of wonder at the beauty of the world (see es-
pecially 6.4.2) and the assurance that study of the world will lead to
the ultimate goal—knowledge of the divine ordering of the world
and of god himself (1.praef.).t r a n sl at or’s i n t r o d u c t io n
14
eye cannot immediately see, but their motives are completely wrong,
being focused on the hoped-for wealth beneath their feet rather than
on the heavens above (5.15). There are different ways of seeking to
master the physical world: these people exploit its resources and seek
to master it for the sake of their own pleasure and greed, while the
philosopher seeks reverently to understand the natural world and the
deity who controls it (7.30). Seneca contrasts the vigorous pursuit of
immoral pleasures by his contemporaries with their complete neglect
of philosophy (7.31–32).16
There is another way of seeking to master the world that is anti-
thetical to the philosopher’s, and that is military and political mastery.
The preface to book 1 speaks disparagingly of the insignificance of
earthly empires when they are compared with the immensity of the
heavens. At the end of book 5 the misuse of the winds to send fleets
off in search of conquests and wars is contrasted with the use of the
winds to travel in search of new knowledge of the world (5.18). This
implies a rather negative view of Roman imperialism, but Seneca’s
main concern is to emphasize the difference between understanding
and controlling the world for the sake of power or pleasure, and the
desire to understand it out of philosophical motives.
The Natural Questions as a Work of Literature
There were many different forms of writing about scientific topics
in the ancient world, including technical treatises written for the
expert or professional, literary dialogues, letters, doxographical works
cataloguing the views of earlier writers, and didactic poems. Seneca’s
prose treatise contains a good deal of detailed and intricate argument,
but at the same time, just as in all his philosophical works, he uses all
his literary skill to create something that will be lively and enjoyable
to read, and the result is very different from the average modern sci-
entific textbook. There are passages of dense argument and detailed
lists and classifications of phenomena, but there also are passages
of vivid description of nature’s power; there are scathing, satirical
denunciations of contemporary lifestyles, along with exhortations to
face death without fear and to take seriously the kind of philosophy
that Seneca is offering.17
The relative independence of the individual books has already
been mentioned, but each book is a carefully crafted unity.18 The15
tr a nsl ator’s introduc tion
patterning of introductions, interludes, and conclusions is carefully
done, and even when the transitions seem at first arbitrary, we can
find subtle links. The last two books to be written show a kind of
ring-compositional architecture that is more usually associated with
poetic works: in book 1 the chapters on optical meteorological phe-
nomena (2–13) are framed by two discussions of meteors (1, 14–15);
in book 2 a long central discussion of divination (32–51) is framed
by two sections on the marvelous effects of lightning (31, 52–53), and
by scientific discussions that move deliberately from doxographical
discussion to presentation of Seneca’s own views (see the analytical
table of contents below).
The scientific sections are enlivened in all sorts of ways. Terse,
economical phrasing, sharp antitheses, and vivid imagery are de-
ployed throughout. Seneca addresses the reader directly, sometimes
asking questions or giving orders (e.g., 3.16.4; 5.14.2; 6.24.6). He
makes periodic use of the trope by which the theorist himself ap-
pears to be “doing” what he actually describes as happening in nature;
for instance, at 2.7.1: “Some people tear air apart and divide it into
particles, mixing void with it” (referring to atomists). He is fond of
saying the same thing twice, even three times, in a slightly different
way (e.g., 2.9.4; 6.1.4; more extensively, 4b.11)—so fond that he once
explains (not altogether convincingly) that this is not just stylistic
showmanship but reinforcement of an essential point (2.21.4). We
have already seen that the scientific discussion regularly takes the
form of a vigorous debate between Seneca and other thinkers. This is
sometimes described in the language of Roman legal procedure (e.g.,
4b.4.1; 4b.5.1; 2.46) or senatorial procedure (e.g., 3.15.1; 6.19.1), which
draws attention not only to the adversarial texture of the Natural
Questions, but also to its aspirations to impartial fairness; at the same
time, such language may appeal to the Roman reader. Sometimes
the reader may get the distinct impression that Seneca is thinking
out loud, speculating “on the hoof,” as it were (e.g., 5.13.4; 2.39.2–4;
2.53.1); but of course this may be a carefully contrived impression—
and another lesson in thinking for ourselves.
Quotations from the poets are frequent in the Natural Questions,
the majority from Virgil and Ovid. The quotations vary the literary
texture, but they are often there to illustrate a scientific point as
well, for ancient poets were expected to know about the workingst r a n sl at or’s i n t r o d u c t io n
16
of the physical world. By the same token, they could be criticized
for getting it wrong. Seneca ticks Virgil off in passing for making
more than one wind blow at once (5.16.2); this is tongue-in-cheek,
for poets were allowed to exaggerate. But he is more serious in his
criticisms of Ovid’s lack of decorum in his description of the great
flood (3.27.13–15).
Some Features of Seneca’s Worldview and Scientific Terminology
Seneca takes for granted certain features of the physical world and
uses certain terms to describe it that were commonplace in his own
day but may be unfamiliar to the modern reader. Some concepts
of Stoic physics have already been described above. Seneca takes
for granted that the cosmos is spherical, with the spherical earth
stationary at the center, and the moon, sun, planets, and fixed stars
rotating round it. They rotate at different speeds: the speeds of the
moon, sun, and fixed stars are constant (though slightly different
from each other), whereas the planets slightly vary their speed and
their direction, sometimes accelerating, slowing down, going into
reverse, or veering sideways in relation to the background of fixed
stars. (In Greek the word planet meant “wandering.”) The earth is
at the center, but Seneca also describes it as being at the bottom of
the cosmos, because heavy things all sink towards it, and the lightest
materials rise to the highest part of the cosmos, its outer sphere of
the fixed stars. The fire of the stars and planets is fed by vapors or
exhalations that constantly rise from the surface of the earth. Seneca
accepts that human vision involves rays going out from the eye to
the seen object.
Modern English has a quite clear distinction between planet,
star, and constellation, but Seneca’s Latin terminology does not (even
though he makes a clear distinction between planetary and stellar
motion): there are two words (sidus and stella), but each could be used
in any of these senses. Seneca can add an adjective, “wandering” or
“erratic,” to make it clear that he is referring to a planet, but without
such an epithet, the sense of the words is often indeterminate or
ambiguous. In book 1 Seneca refers to phenomena of reflection and
of refraction, but his terminology makes no systematic distinction
between the two, nor does his argument, so I sometimes avoid theThe Text of the Natural Questions
The text of our work is less well preserved than that of most of Sen-
eca’s other works. The earliest surviving manuscripts of the Natural
Questions date from the twelfth century (though there are some brief
excerpts of earlier date), and their text is frequently corrupt, so that
it is sometimes uncertain exactly what Seneca wrote. In the transla-
tion, the following typographic signs are used to indicate some of the
major problems and uncertainties:
< > Angle brackets enclose the translation of Latin words that are
not in the manuscripts but are added by the editor (but minor
supplements that are uncontroversial or do not substantially
affect the sense are ignored).
[ ] Square brackets enclose the translation of Latin words that
are in the manuscripts but are regarded as later interpolations,
not Seneca’s own words.
*** Asterisks within angle brackets indicate that something is
missing from the manuscripts, but no supplement is offered
in the translation. Asterisks without brackets indicate that the
Latin is badly corrupt and I have left it untranslated.
I have usually translated the text of my Teubner edition (1996), except
that I translate a different text at the places listed below. In most cases
the differences consist in adopting a supplement or conjecture that is
less than certain but at least gives plausible and intelligible sense.
1.3.8: The direct speech is ended after atque continuae instead of
aciem repellendam.
1.6.3: subito <nascatur, et subito> desinat, cum omnes fulgores <et
paulatim fiant>.
17
tr a nsl ator’s introduc tion
terms reflect and refract in the translation in favor of more neutral
(though less natural) phrases like bend back. Sometimes Latin is ca-
pable of greater precision than English: in book 3 on rivers, Seneca
can exploit the difference between amnis, which is normally a very
large, grand river, and flumen and fluuius, which normally denote
rivers of more average size; but while English has various words for
smaller streams, it has no word like amnis to denote a large river.t r a n sl at or’s i n t r o d u c t io n
18
1.6.6: iam <paene> eius naturae est.
2.2.4: quorsus istud.
2.12.5: nec <extingui nec>.
2.23.2: sit et (in place of †his†).19
2.24.1: aut <falsum est hoc aut>.
2.35.1: <risu> excipiunt.
2.50.1: <quaedam significant id quod ad nos non pertinet,>.
2.51: eidem homini <idem>.
2.53.2: adflata <uitiantur>.
2.59.4: alia uarie fortuna disponit.
2.59.7; peteret <ut praeberet>.
2.59.11: extimescis.
3.16.4: sunt ingentes[que].
3.18.3: ipse oportet mihi credam.
3.19.4: <alii aliquatenus in aperto fluunt,>.
Ibid.: sicut fluminum fontes.
3.20.5: [et] habens.
3.25.10: <ora>.
3.27.2: †his† is omitted.
3.27.5: iam nec gramina aut pabula laeta <laxatum> aquis sustinet.
5.13.3: et (in place of †haec†).
5.18.2: niues is a misprint for nubes.
6.1.5: agit, et (instead of agitat,; see N. Holmes, Classical Quar-
terly 54, no. 1 [2004]: 311–12).
6.2.9: The direct speech is ended after orbe concusso instead of
uidere mortalem.
6.7.6: redundare (in place of †reicere†).
6.9.1: et <ii> quidem non <indocti>.
6.12.1: inquisitor.
6.13.3: <frigido autem aeri qui iam sub terra collectus est> hic calidus
(in place of †huic alius†).
7.1.3: <nisi adiacentem>.
7.11.2: forma eis non est una, <sed eiusdem notae sunt>.
7.14.4: in alias incident.
7.27.1: exhibeat (in place of †accipiat†).Analytical Table of Contents of Individual Books
This table follows the original order in which the books were com-
posed, but with the traditional numbering (see above).
Praef. Introduction: The importance of studying the physical
world.
1–3
Announcement of topic: where rivers come from; the
varied properties of water.
4–5
Why rivers do not raise the sea level.
6–7
Rain as a cause of rivers.
8–10
Underground water as a cause of rivers.
11
Why some rivers dry up periodically.
12–13 Water is one of the four elements, so in plentiful
supply.
14
Other theories.
15
The earth has veins and arteries like the human body.
16.1–3 Periodic springs and rivers.
16.4–5 Underground caves with living creatures.
17–18 Moral excursus: the craze for watching mullets die at the
dining table.
19
Underground fish and underground rivers.
20
The causes of different flavors of water.
21
Lethal exhalations from caves.
22
Primeval water and recently formed water.
24
Hot springs.
25–26 Various unusual properties of springs and rivers.
27–30 Epilogue: the great flood that periodically destroys the
earth and purifies humankind.
Book 4 a: On the Nile
Praef. Advice to Lucilius on combating flattery.
1
The puzzle of the Nile’s source and its annual flooding.
2.1–16 Description of the known course of the Nile.
2.17–30 Different theories of the flooding of the Nile (Thales,
Euthymenes, Oenopides, Diogenes of Apollonia).20
tr a nsl ator’s introduc tion
Book 3: On Terr estr ial Waters
19Book 4 b On Cl ouds, <R a in, H a il , Snow> 21
t r a n sl at or’s i n t r o d u c t io n
20
3–5
6–7
8–12
13
The formation of hail.
The prediction of hailstorms.
Factors that determine whether snow or hail is formed.
Epilogue: the misuse of snow to produce ever-colder
drinks.
Book 5: On W inds
1
2–6
7
8–11
10
12
13
14
15
Definitions of wind.
Causes of wind.
Pre-dawn breezes.
Coastal breezes.
The etesian winds.
Winds from a cloud.
Whirlwinds.
Winds are produced from underground caves.
Excursus: Asclepiodotus’s story of people sent under-
ground by Philip of Macedon.
16–17.4 The twelve principal winds.
17.5
Local winds.
18
Epilogue: nature’s gift of winds has been abused by
humans.
Book 6: On E arthquak es
1–4
Introduction: the recent Campanian earthquake. The need
to free people from fear of earthquakes by enabling them
to understand them.
5
Earthquakes have variously been thought to be caused by
water, fire, earth, air, or a combination.
6–8
Water as cause.
9
Fire as cause.
10
Earth as cause.
11
Fire as cause.
12–19 Air as cause.
20–21.1 All four elements as causes, but chiefly air.
21.2–25 Different kinds of earthquakes and their causes.
26
Earthquakes can occur everywhere.27–31
32
Explanations of unusual events associated with the Cam-
panian earthquake.
Epilogue: how to be free from fear of earthquakes.
21
Book 7 : On Comets
Introduction: rare phenomena like comets attract more
attention than regular phenomena.
2
Questions concerning comets.
3–4.1 Brief history of the study of comets.
4.2–10 Epigenes’ theory: comets form in the atmosphere.
11
Properties of comets.
12
The theory that comets are the conjunction of two planets.
13–16 Artemidorus’s theory: comets are the conjunction of two
planets, many of them unknown.
17–18 Apollonius of Myndus’s theory: comets are unknown
planets.
19–21 Stoic theories: comets form in the atmosphere.
22–29 Arguments that comets are akin to planets.
30
Epilogue: the need for reverence when investigating
nature.
31–32 Contemporary neglect of philosophy and pursuit of luxury
and vice.
Book 1: On . . . Fir es
Praef. Introduction: the highest form of philosophy is the study
of god and the cosmos.
1
Meteors.
2
Coronae.
3–8
Rainbows.
9–10 Rods.
11–13 Parhelia.
14–15 Meteors.
16
Epilogue: Hostius Quadra and the misuse of mirrors.
17
The proper uses of mirrors.
Book 2: On Lightning and Thunder
1
Introduction: the branches of physical science: astronomy,
meteorology and earth sciences.
tr a nsl ator’s introduc tion
12–11
12–20
t r a n sl at or’s i n t r o d u c t io n
22
The properties of air.
Thunder, lightning-flash and lightning-bolt: review of
earlier theories.
20–26 The theory accepted by Seneca.
27–29 Different kinds of thunder.
30
Formation of thunder and lightning from dry clouds.
31
Marvelous effects of lightning.
32–51 Divination from lightning: comparison of the Etruscan
and Stoic views.
52–53 Marvelous effects of lightning.
54–56 Review of earlier theories of thunder and lightning.
57–58 The theory accepted by Seneca.
59
Epilogue: Removing the fear of lightning.