
1
•
THE ENDLESS BEGINNING
Of the evidence that we have amassed to support our conclusions, exhibit
number one is Man himself. In many ways, modern man—Homo sapiens—is
a stranger to Earth.
Ever since Charles Darwin shocked the scholars and theologians of his
time with the evidence of evolution, life on Earth has been traced through
Man and the primates, mammals, and vertebrates, and backward through
ever-lower life forms to the point, billions of years ago, at which life is
presumed to have begun.
But having reached these beginnings and having begun to contemplate the
probabilities of life elsewhere in our solar system and beyond, the scholars
have become uneasy about life on Earth: Somehow, it does not belong here.
If it began through a series of spontaneous chemical reactions, why does life
on Earth have but a single source, and not a multitude of chance sources?
And why does all living matter on Earth contain too little of the chemical
elements that abound on Earth, and too much of those that are rare on our
planet?
Was life, then, imported to Earth from elsewhere?
Man's position in the evolutionary chain has compounded the puzzle.
Finding a broken skull here, a jaw there, scholars at first believed that Man
originated in Asia some 500,000 years ago. But as older fossils were found,
it became evident that the mills of evolution grind much, much slower. Man's
ancestor apes are now placed at a staggering 25,000,000 years ago.
Discoveries in East Africa reveal a transition to manlike apes (hominids)
some 14,000,000 years ago. It was about 11,000,000 years later that the first
ape-man worthy of the classification Homo appeared there.
The first being considered to be truly manlike—"Advanced
Australopithecus"—existed in the same parts of Africa some 2,000,000 years
ago. It took yet another million years to produce Homo erectus. Finally, after
another 900,000 years, the first primitive Man appeared; he is named
Neanderthal after the site where his remains were first found.
In spite of the passage of more than 2,000,000 years between Advanced
Australopithecus and Neanderthal, the tools of these two groups—sharp
stones—were virtually alike; and the groups themselves (as they are
believed to have looked) were hardly distinguishable. (Fig.1)
Fig. 1
Then, suddenly and inexplicably, some 35,000 years ago, a new race of
Men—Homo sapiens ("thinking Man")—appeared as if from nowhere, and
swept Neanderthal Man from the face of Earth. These modern Men—named
Cro-Magnon—looked so much like us that, if dressed like us in modern
clothes, they would be lost in the crowds of any European or American city.
Because of the magnificent cave art which they created, they were at first
called "cavemen." In fact, they roamed Earth freely, for they knew how to
build shelters and homes of stones and animal skins wherever they went.
For millions of years, Man's tools had been simply stones of useful shapes.
Cro-Magnon Man, however, made specialized tools and weapons of wood
and bones. He was no longer a "naked ape," for he used skins for clothing.
His society was organized; he lived in clans with a patriarchal hegemony.
His cave drawings bespeak artistry and depth of feeling; his drawings and
sculptures evidence some form of "religion," apparent in the worship of a
Mother Goddess, who was sometimes depicted with the sign of the Moon's
crescent. He buried his dead, and must therefore have had some philosophies
regarding life, death, and perhaps even an afterlife.
As mysterious and unexplained as the appearance of Cro-Magnon Man has
been, the puzzle is still more complicated. For, as other remains of modern
Man were discovered (at sites including Swanscombe, Steinheim, and
Montmaria), it became apparent that Cro-Magnon Man stemmed from an
even earlier Homo sapiens who lived in western Asia and North Africa
some 250,000 years before Cro-Magnon Man.
The appearance of modern Man a mere 700,000 years after Homo erectus
and some 200,000 years before Neanderthal Man is absolutely implausible.
It is also clear that Homo sapiens represents such an extreme departure from
the slow evolutionary process that many of our features, such as the ability to
speak, are totally unrelated to the earlier primates.
An outstanding authority on the subject, Professor Theodosius Dobzhansky
(Mankind Evolving), was especially puzzled by the fact that this
development took place during a period when Earth was going through an ice
age, a most unpropitious time for evolutionary advance. Pointing out that
Homo sapiens lacks completely some of the peculiarities of the previously
known types, and has some that never appeared before, he concluded:
"Modern man has many fossil collateral relatives but no progenitors; the
derivation of Homo sapiens, then, becomes a puzzle."
How, then, did the ancestors of modern Man appear some 300,000 years
ago—instead of 2,000,000 or 3,000,000 years in the future, following further
evolutionary development? Were we imported to Earth from elsewhere, or
were we, as the Old Testament and other ancient sources claim, created by
the gods?
We now know where civilization began and how it developed, once it
began. The unanswered question is: Why—why did civilization come about
at all? For, as most scholars now admit in frustration, by all data Man should
still be without civilization. There is no obvious reason that we should be
any more civilized than the primitive tribes of the Amazon jungles or the
inaccessible parts of New Guinea.
But, we are told, these tribesmen still live as if in the Stone Age because
they have been isolated. But isolated from what? If they have been living on
the same Earth as we, why have they not acquired the same knowledge of
sciences and technologies on their own as we supposedly have?
The real puzzle, however, is not the backwardness of the Bushmen, but our
advancement; for it is now recognized that in the normal course of evolution
Man should still be typified by the Bushmen and not by us. It took Man some
2,000,000 years to advance in his "tool industries" from the use of stones as
he found them to the realization that he could chip and shape stones to better
suit his purposes. Why not another 2,000,000 years to learn the use of other
materials, and another 10,000,000 years to master mathematics and
engineering and astronomy? Yet here we are, less than 50,000 years from
Neanderthal Man, landing astronauts on the Moon.
The obvious question, then, is this: Did we and our Mediterranean
ancestors really acquire this advanced civilization on our own?
Though Cro-Magnon Man did not build skyscrapers nor use metals, there
is no doubt that his was a sudden and revolutionary civilization. His
mobility, ability to build shelters, his desire to clothe himself, his
manufactured tools, his art—all were a sudden high civilization breaking an
endless beginning of Man's culture that stretched over millions of years and
advanced at a painfully slow pace.
Though our scholars cannot explain the appearance of Homo sapiens and
the civilization of Cro-Magnon Man, there is by now no doubt regarding this
civilization's place of origin: the Near East. The uplands and mountain
ranges that extend in a semiarc from the Zagros Mountains in the east (where
present-day Iran and Iraq border on each other), through the Ararat and
Taurus ranges in the north, then down, westward and southward, to the hill
lands of Syria, Lebanon, and Israel, are replete with caves where the
evidence of prehistoric but modern Man has been preserved. (Fig. 2)
Fig. 2
One of these caves, Shanidar, is located in the northeastern part of the
semiarc of civilization. Nowadays, fierce Kurdish tribesmen seek shelter in
the area's caves for themselves and their flocks during the cold winter
months. So it was, one wintry night 44,000 years ago, when a family of seven
(one of whom was a baby) sought shelter in the cave of Shanidar.
Their remains—they were evidently crushed to death by a rockfall—were
discovered in 1957 by a startled Ralph Solecki, who went to the area in
search of evidence of early Man. What he found was more than he expected.
As layer upon layer of debris was removed, it became apparent that the cave
preserved a clear record of Man's habitation in the area from about 100,000
to some 13,000 years ago.
What this record showed was as surprising as the find itself. Man's culture
has shown not a progression but a regression. Starting from a certain
standard, the following generations showed not more advanced but less
advanced standards of civilized life. And from about 27,000 B.C. to 11,000
B.C., the regressing and dwindling population reached the point of an almost
complete absence of habitation. For reasons that are assumed to have been
climatic, Man was almost completely gone from the whole area for some
16,000 years.
And then, circa 11,000 B.C., "thinking Man" reappeared with new vigor
and on an inexplicably higher cultural level.
It was as if an unseen coach, watching the faltering human game,
dispatched to the field a fresh and better-trained team to take over from the
exhausted one.
•
Throughout the many millions of years of his endless beginning, Man was
nature's child; he subsisted by gathering the foods that grew wild, by hunting
the wild animals, by catching wild birds and fishes. But just as Man's
settlements were thinning out, just as he was abandoning his abodes, when
his material and artistic achievements were disappearing—just then,
suddenly, with no apparent reason and without any prior known period of
gradual preparation-Man became a farmer.
Summarizing the work of many eminent authorities on the subject, R. J.
Braidwood and B. Howe (Prehistoric Investigations in Iraqi Kurdistan)
concluded that genetic studies confirm the archaeological finds and leave no
doubt that agriculture began exactly where thinking Man had emerged earlier
with his first crude civilization: in the Near East. There is no doubt by now
that agriculture spread all over the world from the Near Eastern arc of
mountains and highlands.
Employing sophisticated methods of radiocarbon dating and plant genetics,
many scholars from various fields of science concur in the conclusion that
Man's first farming venture was the cultivation of wheat and barley, probably
through the domestication of a wild variety of emmer. Assuming that,
somehow, Man did undergo a gradual process of teaching himself how to
domesticate, grow, and farm a wild plant, the scholars remain baffled by the
profusion of other plants and cereals basic to human survival and
advancement that kept coming out of the Near East. These included, in rapid
succession, millet, rye, and spelt, among the edible cereals; flax, which
provided fibers and edible oil; and a variety of fruit-bearing shrubs and
trees.
In every instance, the plant was undoubtedly domesticated in the Near East
for millennia before it reached Europe. It was as though the Near East were
some kind of genetic-botanical laboratory, guided by an unseen hand,
producing every so often a newly domesticated plant.
The scholars who have studied the origins of the grapevine have
concluded that its cultivation began in the mountains around northern
Mesopotamia and in Syria and Palestine. No wonder. The Old Testament
tells us that Noah "planted a vineyard" (and even got drunk on its wine) after
his ark rested on Mount Ararat as the waters of the Deluge receded. The
Bible, like the scholars, thus places the start of vine cultivation in the
mountains of northern Mesopotamia.
Apples, pears, olives, figs, almonds, pistachios, walnuts—all originated
in the Near East and spread from there to Europe and other parts of the
world. Indeed, we cannot help recalling that the Old Testament preceded our
scholars by several millennia in identifying the very same area as the world's
first orchard: "And the Lord God planted an orchard in Eden, in the east....
And the Lord God caused to grow, out of the ground, every tree that is
pleasant to behold and that is good for eating."
The general location of "Eden" was certainly known to the biblical
generations. It was "in the east"—east of the Land of Israel. It was in a land
watered by four major rivers, two of which are the Tigris and the Euphrates.
There can be no doubt that the Book of Genesis located the first orchard in
the highlands where these rivers originated, in northeastern Mesopotamia.
Bible and science are in full agreement.
As a matter of fact, if we read the original Hebrew text of the Book of
Genesis not as a theological but as a scientific text, we find that it also
accurately describes the process of plant domestication. Science tells us that
the process went from wild grasses to wild cereals to cultivated cereals,
followed by fruit-bearing shrubs and trees. This is exactly the process
detailed in the first chapter of the Book of Genesis.
And the Lord said:
"Let the Earth bring forth grasses;
cereals that by seeds produce seeds;
fruit trees that bear fruit by species,
which contain the seed within themselves."
And it was so:
The Earth brought forth grass;
cereals that by seed produce seed, by species;
and trees that bear fruit, which contain
the seed within themselves, by species.
The Book of Genesis goes on to tell us that Man, expelled from the
orchard of Eden, had to toil hard to grow his food. "By the sweat of thy brow
shalt thou eat bread," the Lord said to Adam. It was after that that "Abel was
a keeper of herds and Cain was a tiller of the soil." Man, the Bible tells us,
became a shepherd soon after he became a farmer.
Scholars are in full agreement with this biblical sequence of events.
Analyzing the various theories regarding animal domestication, F. E. Zeuner
(Domestication of Animals) stresses that Man could not have "acquired the
habit of keeping animals in captivity or domestication before he reached the
stage of living in social units of some size." Such settled communities, a
prerequisite for animal domestication, followed the changeover to
agriculture.
The first animal to be domesticated was the dog, and not necessarily as
Man's best friend but probably also for food. This, it is believed, took place
circa 9500 B.C. The first skeletal remains of dogs have been found in Iran,
Iraq, and Israel.
Sheep were domesticated at about the same time; the Shanidar cave
contains remains of sheep from circa 9000 B.C., showing that a large part of
each year's young were killed for food and skins. Goats, which also provided
milk, soon followed; and pigs, horned cattle, and hornless cattle were next to
be domesticated.
In every instance, the domestication began in the Near East.
The abrupt change in the course of human events that occurred circa
11,000 B.C. in the Near East (and some 2,000 years later in Europe) has led
scholars to describe that time as the clear end of the Old Stone Age (the
Paleolithic) and the beginning of a new cultural era, the Middle Stone Age
(Mesolithic).
The name is appropriate only if one considers Man's principal raw
material-which continued to be stone. His dwellings in the mountainous areas
were still built of stone; his communities were protected by stone walls; his
first agricultural implement—the sickle—was made of stone. He honored or
protected his dead by covering and adorning their graves with stones; and he
used stone to make images of the supreme beings, or "gods," whose benign
intervention he sought. One such image, found in northern Israel and dated to
the ninth millennium B.C., shows the carved head of a "god" shielded by a
striped helmet and wearing some kind of "goggles." (Fig. 3)
From an overall point of view, however, it would be more appropriate to
call the age that began circa 11,000 B.C. not the Middle Stone Age but the
Age of Domestication. Within the span of a mere 3,600 years—overnight in
terms of the endless beginning—Man became a farmer, and wild plants and
animals were domesticated. Then, a new age clearly followed. Our scholars
call it the New Stone Age (Neolithic); but the term is totally inadequate, for
the main change that had taken place circa 7500 B.C. was the appearance of
pottery.
Fig. 3
For reasons that still elude our scholars—but which will become clear as
we unfold our tale of prehistoric events—Man's march toward civilization
was confined, for the first several millennia after 11,000 B.C., to the
highlands of the Near East. The discovery of the many uses to which clay
could be put was contemporary with Man's descent from his mountain abodes
toward the lower, mud-filled valleys.
By the seventh millennium B.C., the Near Eastern arc of civilization was
teeming with clay or pottery cultures, which produced great numbers of
utensils, ornaments, and statuettes. By 5000 B.C., the Near East was
producing clay and pottery objects of superb quality and fantastic design.
But once again progress slowed, and by 4500 B.C., archaeological
evidence indicates, regression was all around. Pottery became simpler. Stone
utensils—a relic of the Stone Age—again became predominant. Inhabited
sites reveal fewer remains. Some sites that had been centers of pottery and
clay industries began to be abandoned, and distinct clay manufacturing
disappeared. "There was a general impoverishment of culture," according to
James Melaart (Earliest Civilizations of the Near East); some sites clearly
bear the marks of "the new poverty-stricken phase."
Man and his culture were clearly on the decline.
Then—suddenly, unexpectedly, inexplicably—the Near East witnessed the
blossoming of the greatest civilization imaginable, a civilization in which our
own is firmly rooted.
A mysterious hand once more picked Man out of his decline and raised
him to an even higher level of culture, knowledge, and civilization.