
10
•
CITIES OF THE GODS
The story of the first settlement of Earth by intelligent beings is a
breathtaking saga no less inspiring than the discovery of America or the
circumnavigation of Earth. It was certainly of greater importance, for, as a
result of this settlement, we and our civilizations exist today.
The "Epic of Creation" informs us that the "gods" came to Earth following
a deliberate decision by their leader. The Babylonian version, attributing the
decision to Marduk, explains that he waited until Earth's soil dried and
hardened sufficiently to permit landing and construction operations. Then
Marduk announced his decision to the group of astronauts:
In the deep Above,
where you have been residing,
"The Kingly House of Above" have I built.
Now, a counterpart of it
I shall build in The Below.
Marduk then explained his purpose:
When from the Heavens
for assembly you shall descend,
there shall be a restplace for the night
to receive you all.
I will name it "Babylon"–
The Gateway of the Gods.
Earth was thus not merely the object of a visit or a quick, exploratory stay;
it was to be a permanent "home away from home."
Traveling on board a planet that was itself a kind of spaceship, crossing
the paths of most of the other planets, the Nefilim no doubt first scanned the
heavens from the surface of their own planet. Unmanned probes must have
followed. Sooner or later they acquired the capacity to send out manned
missions to the other planets.
As the Nefilim searched for an additional "home," Earth must have struck
them favorably. Its blue hues indicated it had life-sustaining water and air; its
browns disclosed firm land; its greens, vegetation and the basis for animal
life. Yet when the Nefilim finally voyaged to Earth, it must have looked
somewhat different from the way it does to our astronauts today. For when
the Nefilim first came to Earth, Earth was in the midst of an ice age—a
glacial period that was one of the icing and deicing phases of Earth's climate.
Early glaciation—begun some 600,000 years ago
First warming (interglacial period)—550,000 years ago
Second glacial period—480,000 to 430,000 years ago
When the Nefilim first landed on Earth some 450,000 years ago, about a
third of Earth's land area was covered with ice sheets and glaciers. With so
much of Earth's waters frozen, rainfall was reduced, but not everywhere. Due
to the peculiarities of wind patterns and terrain, among other things, some
areas that are well watered today were barren then, and some areas with
only seasonal rains now were experiencing year-round rainfalls then.
The sea levels were also lower because so much water had been captured
as ice on the land masses. Evidence indicates that at the height of the two
major ice ages, sea levels were as much as 600 to 700 feet lower than at
present. Therefore, there was dry land where we now have seas and
coastlines. Where rivers continued to run, they created deep gorges and
canyons if their courses took them through rocky terrain; if their courses ran
in soft earth and clay, they reached the ice-age seas through vast marshlands.
Arriving on Earth amidst such climatic and geographic conditions, where
were the Nefilim to set up their first abode?
They searched, no doubt, for a place with a relatively temperate climate,
where simple shelters would suffice and where they could move about in
light working clothes rather than in heavily insulated suits. They must also
have searched for water for drinking, washing, and industrial purposes, as
well as to sustain the plant and animal life needed for food. Rivers would
both facilitate the irrigation of large tracts of land and provide a convenient
means of transportation.
Only a rather narrow temperate zone on Earth could meet all these
requirements, as well as the need for the long, flat areas suitable for
landings. The attention of the Nefilim, as we now know, focused on three
major river systems and their plains: the Nile, the Indus, and the Tigris–
Euphrates. Each of these river basins was suitable for early colonization;
each, in time, became the center of an ancient civilization.
The Nefilim would hardly have ignored another need: a source of fuel and
energy. On Earth, petroleum has been a versatile and abundant source of
energy, heat, and light, as well as a vital raw material from which countless
essential goods are made. The Nefilim, judging by Sumerian practice and
records, made extensive use of petroleum and its derivatives; it stands to
reason that in their search for the most suitable habitat on Earth, the Nefilim
would prefer a site rich in petroleum.
With this in mind, the Nefilim probably placed the Indus plain in last
place, for it is not an area where oil could be found. The Nile valley was
probably given second place; geologically it lies in a major sedimentary rock
zone, but the area's oil is found only at some distance from the valley and
requires deep drilling. The Land of the Two Rivers, Mesopotamia, was
doubtless put in first place. Some of the world's richest oil fields stretch
from the tip of the Persian Gulf to the mountains where the Tigris and
Euphrates originate. And while in most places one must drill deep to bring
up the crude oil, in ancient Sumer (now southern Iraq), bitumens, tars,
pitches, and asphalts bubbled or flowed up to the surface naturally.
(Interestingly, the Sumerians had names for all bituminous substances—
petroleum, crude oils, native asphalts, rock asphalts, tars, pyrogenic asphalts,
mastics, waxes, and pitches. They had nine different names for the various
bitumens. By comparison, the ancient Egyptian language had only two, and
Sanskrit, only three.)
The Book of Genesis describes God's abode on Earth—Eden—as a place
of temperate climate, warm yet breezy, for God took afternoon strolls to
catch the cooling breeze. It was a place of good soil, lending itself to
agriculture and horticulture, especially the cultivation of orchards. It was a
place that drew its waters from a network of four rivers. "And the name of
the third river [was] Hidekel [Tigris]; it is the one which floweth towards the
east of Assyria; and the fourth was the Euphrates."
While opinions regarding the identity of the first two rivers, Pishon
("abundant") and Gihon ("which gushes forth"), are inconclusive, there is no
uncertainty regarding the other two rivers, the Tigris and the Euphrates. Some
scholars locate Eden in northern Mesopotamia, where the two rivers and two
lesser tributaries originate; others (such as E. A. Speiser, in The Rivers of
Paradise) believe that the four streams converged at the head of the Persian
Gulf, so that Eden was not in northern but in southern Mesopotamia.
The biblical name Eden is of Mesopotamian origin, stemming from the
Akkadian edinu, meaning "plain." We recall that the "divine" title of the
ancient gods was DIN.GIR ("the righteous/just ones of the rockets"). A
Sumerian name for the gods' abode, E.DIN, would have meant "home of the
righteous ones"—a fitting description.
The selection of Mesopotamia as the home on Earth was probably
motivated by at least one other important consideration. Though the Nefilim
in time established a spaceport on dry land, some evidence suggests that at
least initially they landed by splashing down into the sea in a hermetically
sealed capsule. If this was the landing method, Mesopotamia offered
proximity to not one but two seas—the Indian Ocean to the south and the
Mediterranean to the west—so that in case of an emergency, the landing did
not have to depend on one watery site alone. As we shall see, a good bay or
gulf from which long sea voyages could be launched was also essential.
In ancient texts and pictures, the craft of the Nefilim were initially termed
"celestial boats." The landing of such "maritime" astronauts, one can
imagine, might have been described in ancient epic tales as the appearance of
some kind of submarine from the heavens in the sea, from which "fish-men"
emerged and came ashore.
The texts do, in fact, mention that some of the AB.GAL who navigated the
spaceships were dressed as fish. One text dealing with Ishtar's divine
journeys quotes her as seeking to reach the "Great gallu" (chief navigator)
who had gone away "in a sunken boat." Berossus transmitted legends
regarding Oannes, the "Being Endowed with Reason," a god who made his
appearance from "the Erythrean sea which bordered on Babylonia," in the
first year of the descent of Kingship from Heaven. Berossus reported that
though Oannes looked like a fish, he had a human head under the fish's head,
and had feet like a man under the fish's tail. "His voice too and language
were articulate and human." (Fig. 126)
The three Greek historians through whom we know what Berossus wrote,
reported that such divine fish-men appeared periodically, coming ashore
from the "Erythrean sea"—the body of water we now call the Arabian Sea
(the western part of the Indian Ocean).
Why would the Nefilim splash down in the Indian Ocean, hundreds of
miles from their selected site in Mesopotamia, instead of in the Persian Gulf,
which is so much closer? The ancient reports indirectly confirm our
conclusion that the first landings occurred during the second glacial period,
when today's Persian Gulf was not a sea but a stretch of marshlands and
shallow lakes, in which a splashdown was impossible.
Coming down in the Arabian Sea, the first intelligent beings or Earth then
made their way toward Mesopotamia. The marshlands extended deeper
inland than today's coastline. There, at the edge of the marshes, they
established their very first settlement on our planet.
Fig. 126
They named it E.RI.DU ("house in faraway built"). What an appropriate
name!
To this very day, the Persian term ordu means "encampment." It is a word
whose meaning has taken root in all languages: The settled Earth is called
Erde in German, Erda in Old High German, Jordh in Icelandic, Jord in
Danish, Airtha in Gothic, Erthe in Middle English; and, going back
geographically and in time, "Earth" was Aratha or Ereds in Aramaic, Erd or
Ertz in Kurdish, and Eretz in Hebrew.
At Eridu, in southern Mesopotamia, the Nefilim established Earth Station
I, a lonely outpost on a half-frozen planet. (Fig. 127)
•
Sumerian texts, confirmed by later Akkadian translations, list the original
settlements or "cities" of the Nefilim in the order in which they were
established. We are even told which god was put in charge of each of these
settlements. A Sumerian text, believed to have been the original of the
Akkadian "Deluge Tablets," relates the following regarding five of the first
seven cities:
After kingship had been lowered from heaven,
after the exalted crown, the throne of kingship
had been lowered from heaven,
he ... perfected the procedures,
the divine ordinances....
Founded five cities in pure places,
called their names,
laid them out as centers.
A lonely outpost on an alien planet:
Asia as it probably looked like from the air in the midst of an ice
stage. Lower sea levels meant coastlines different from ours today. The
Persian Gulf and southern Mesopotamia were patches of muddy ground,
lakes and marshlands.
Fig. 127
The first of these cities, ERIDU,
he gave to Nudimmud, the leader.
The second, BAD-TIBIRA,
he gave to Nugig.
The third, LARAK,
he gave to Pabilsag.
The fourth, SIPPAR,
he gave to the hero Utu.
The fifth, SHURUPPAK,
he gave to Sud.
The name of the god who lowered Kingship from Heaven, planned the
establishment of Eridu and four other cities, and appointed their governors or
commanders, is unfortunately obliterated. All the texts agree, however, that
the god who waded ashore to the edge of the marshlands and said "Here we
settle" was Enki, nicknamed "Nudimmud" ("he who made things") in the text.
This god's two names—EN.KI ("lord of firm ground") and E.A ("whose
house is water")—were most appropriate. Eridu, which remained Enki's seat
of power and center of worship throughout Mesopotamian history, was built
on ground artificially raised above the waters of the marshlands. The
evidence is contained in a text named (by S. N. Kramer) the "Myth of Enki
and Eridu":
The lord of the watery-deep, the king Enki ...
built his house....
In Eridu he built the House of the Water Bank....
The king Enki ... has built a house:
Eridu, like a mountain,
he raised up from the earth;
in a good place he had built it.
These and other, mostly fragmentary texts suggest that one of the first
concerns of these "colonists" on Earth had to do with the shallow lakes or
watery marshes. "He brought ...; established the cleaning of the small rivers."
The effort to dredge the beds of streams and tributaries to allow a better flow
of the waters was intended to drain the marshes, obtain cleaner, potable
water, and implement controlled irrigation. The Sumerian narrative also
indicates some landfilling or the raising of dikes to protect the first houses
from the omnipresent waters.
A text named by scholars the "myth" of "Enki and the Land's Order" is one
of the longest and best preserved of Sumerian narrative poems so far
uncovered. Its text consists of some 470 lines, of which 375 are perfectly
legible. Its beginning (some 50 lines) is, unfortunately, broken. The verses
that follow are devoted to an exaltation of Enki and to the establishment of
his relationship with the chief deity Anu (his father), Ninti (his sister), and
Enlil (his brother).
Following these introductions, Enki himself "picks up the microphone." As
fantastic as it may sound, the fact is that the text amounts to a first-person
report by Enki of his landing on Earth.
"When I approached Earth,
there was much flooding.
When I approached its green meadows,
heaps and mounds were piled up
at my command.
I built my house in a pure place....
My house–
Its shade stretches over the Snake Marsh....
The carp fish wave their tails in it
among the small gizi reeds."
The poem then goes on to describe and record, in the third person, the
achievements of Enki. Here are some selected verses:
He marked the marshland,
placed in it carp and ...–fish;
He marked the cane thicket,
placed in it ...–reeds and green-reeds.
Enbilulu, the Inspector of Canals,
he placed in charge of the marshlands.
Him who set net so no fish escapes,
whose trap no ... escapes,
whose snare no bird escapes,
... the son of ... a god who loves fish
Enki placed in charge of fish and birds.
Enkimdu, the one of the ditch and dike,
Enki placed in charge of ditch and dike.
Him whose ... mold directs,
Kulla, the brick-maker of the Land,
Enki placed in charge of mold and brick.
The poem lists other achievements of Enki, including the purification of
the waters of the Tigris River and the joining (by canal) of the Tigris and
Euphrates. His house by the watery bank adjoined a wharf at which reed rafts
and boats could anchor, and from which they could sail off. Appropriately,
the house was named E.ABZU ("house of the Deep"). Enki's sacred precinct
in Eridu was known by this name for millennia thereafter.
No doubt Enki and his landing party explored the lands around Eridu, but
he appears to have preferred traveling by water. The marshland, he said in
one of the texts, "is my favorite spot; it stretches out its arms to me." In other
texts Enki described sailing in the marshlands in his boat, named MA.GUR
(literally, "boat to turn about in"), namely, a touring boat. He tells how his
crewmen "drew on the oars in unison," how they used to "sing sweet songs,
causing the river to rejoice." At such times, he confided, "sacred songs and
spells filled my Watery Deep." Even such a minor detail as the name of the
captain of Enki's boat is recorded. (Fig. 128)
Fig. 128
The Sumerian king lists indicate that Enki and his first group of Nefilim
remained alone on Earth for quite a while: Eight shar's (28,800 years)
passed before the second commander or "settlement chief" was named.
Interesting light is shed on the subject as we examine the astronomical
evidence. Scholars have been puzzled by the apparent Sumerian "confusion"
regarding which one of the twelve zodiacal houses was associated with Enki.
The sign of the fish-goat, which stood for the constellation Capricorn, was
apparently associated with Enki (and, indeed, may explain the epithet of the
founder of Eridu, A.LU.LIM, which could mean "sheep of the glittering
waters"). Yet Ea/Enki was frequently depicted as holding vases of flowing
waters—the original Water Bearer, or Aquarius; and he was certainly the
God of Fishes, and thus associated with Pisces.
Astronomers are hard put to clarify how the ancient stargazers actually
saw in a group of stars the outlines of, say, fishes or a water bearer. The
answer that comes to mind is that the signs of the zodiac were not named
after the shape of the star group but after the epithet or main activity of a god
primarily associated with the time when the vernal equinox was in that
particular zodiacal house.
If Enki landed on Earth—as we believe—at the end of an Age of Pisces,
witnessed a precessional shift to Aquarius, and stayed through a Great Year
(25,920 years) until an Age of Capricorn began, then he was indeed in sole
command on Earth the purported 28,800 years.
The reported passage of time also confirms our earlier conclusion that the
Nefilim arrived on Earth in the midst of an ice age. The hard work of raising
dikes and digging canals commenced when climatic conditions were still
harsh. But within a few shar's of their landing, the glacial period was giving
way to a warmer and rainier climate (circa 430,000 years ago). It was then
that the Nefilim decided to move farther inland and expand their settlements.
Befittingly, the Anunnaki (rank-and-file Nefilim) named the second
commander of Eridu A.LAL.GAR ("he who in raintime brought rest.")
But while Enki was enduring the hardships of a pioneer on Earth, Anu and
his other son Enlil were watching the developments from the Twelfth Planet.
The Mesopotamian texts make it clear that the one who was really in charge
of the Earth mission was Enlil; and as soon as the decision was made to
proceed with the mission, Enlil himself descended to Earth. For him a
special settlement or base named Larsa was built by EN.KI.DU.NU ("Enki
digs deep"). When Enlil took personal charge of the place, he was nicknamed
ALIM ("ram"), coinciding with the "age" of the zodiacal constellation Aries.
The establishment of Larsa launched a new phase in the settlement of Earth
by the Nefilim. It marked the decision to proceed with the tasks for which
they had come to Earth, which required the shipping to Earth of more
"manpower," tools, and equipment, and the return of valuable cargoes to the
Twelfth Planet.
Splashdowns at sea were no longer adequate for such heavier loads. The
climatic changes made the interior more accessible; it was time to shift the
landing site to the center of Mesopotamia. At that juncture, Enlil came to
Earth and proceeded from Larsa to establish a "Mission Control Center"—a
sophisticated command post from which the Nefilim on Earth could
coordinate space journeys to and from their home planet, guide in landing
shuttlecraft, and perfect their takeoffs and dockings with the spaceship
orbiting Earth.
The site Enlil selected for this purpose, known for millennia as Nippur,
was named by him NIBRU.KI ("Earth's crossing"). (We recall that the
celestial site of the Twelfth Planet's closest pass to Earth was called the
"Celestial Place of the Crossing.") There Enlil established the DUR.AN.KI,
the "bond Heaven—Earth."
The task was understandably complex and time-consuming. Enlil stayed in
Larsa for 6 shar's (21,600 years) while Nippur was under construction. The
Nippurian undertaking was also lengthy, as evidenced by the zodiacal
nicknames of Enlil. Having paralleled the Ram (Aries) while in Larsa, he
was subsequently associated with the Bull (Taurus). Nippur was established
in the "age" of Taurus.
A devotional poem composed as a "Hymn to Enlil, the All-Beneficent"
and glorifying EnliI, his consort Ninlil, his city Nippur, and its "lofty house,"
the E.KUR, tells us much about Nippur. For one thing, Enlil had at his
disposal there some highly sophisticated instruments: a "lifted 'eye' which
scans the land," and a "lifted beam which searches the heart of all the land."
Nippur, the poem tells us, was protected by awesome weapons: "Its sight is
awesome fear, dread"; from "its outside, no mighty god can approach." Its
"arm" was a "vast net," and in its midst there crouched a "fast-stepping bird,"
a "bird" whose "hand" the wicked and the evil could not escape. Was the
place protected by some death ray, by an electronic power field? Was there
in its center a helicopter pad, a "bird" so swift no one could outrun its reach?
In the center of Nippur, atop an artificially raised platform, stood Enlil's
headquarters, the KI.UR ("place of Earth's root")—the place where the "bond
between Heaven and Earth" rose. This was the communications center of
Mission Control, the place from which the Anunnaki on Earth communicated
with their comrades, the IGI.GI ("they who turn and see") in the orbiting
spacecraft.
At this center, the ancient text goes on to say, stood a "heavenward tall
pillar reaching to the sky." This extremely tall "pillar," firmly planted on the
ground "as a platform that cannot be overturned," was used by Enlil to
"pronounce his word" heavenward. This is a simple description of a
broadcasting tower. Once the "word of Enlil"—his command—"approached
heaven, abundance would pour down on Earth." What a simple way to
describe the flow of materials, special foods, medicines, and tools brought
down by the shuttlecraft, once the "word" from Nippur was given!
This Control Center on a raised platform, Enlil's "lofty house," contained a
mysterious chamber, named the DIR.GA:
As mysterious as the distant Waters,
as the Heavenly Zenith.
Among its ... emblems,
the emblems of the stars.
The ME it carries to perfection.
Its words are for utterance....
Its words are gracious oracles.
What was this dirga? Breaks in the ancient tablet have robbed us of more
data; but the name speaks for itself, for it means "the dark, crownlike
chamber," a place where star charts were kept, where predictions were
made, where the me (the astronaut's communications) were received and
transmitted. The description reminds us of Mission Control in Houston,
Texas, monitoring the astronauts on their Moon missions, amplifying their
communications, plotting their courses against the starry sky, giving them
"gracious oracles" of guidance.
We may recall here the tale of the god Zu, who made his way to Enlil's
sanctuary and snatched away the Tablet of Destinies, where-upon "suspended
was the issuance of commands... the hallowed inner chamber lost its
brilliance... stillness spread... silence prevailed."
In the "Epic of Creation," the "destinies" of the planetary gods were their
orbits. It is reasonable to assume that the Tablet of Destinies, which was so
vital to the functions of Enlil's "Mission Control Center," also controlled the
orbits and flight paths of the spaceships that maintained the "bond" between
Heaven and Earth. It might have been the vital "black box" containing the
computer programs that guided the spaceships, without which the contact
between the Nefilim on Earth and their link to the Home Planet was
disrupted.
Most scholars take the name EN.LIL to mean "lord of the wind," which fits
the theory that the ancients "personified" the elements of nature and thus
assigned one god to be in charge of winds and storms. Yet some scholars
have already suggested that in this instance the term LIL means not a stormy
wind of nature but the "wind" that comes out of the mouth—an utterance, a
command, a spoken communication. Once again, the archaic Sumerian
pictographs for the term EN—especially as applied to Enlil—and for the
term LIL, shed light on the subject. For what we see is a structure with a high
tower of antennas rising from it, as well as a contraption that looks very
much like the giant radar nets erected nowadays for capturing and emitting
signals—the "vast net" described in the texts. (Fig. 129)
In Bad-Tibira, established as an industrial center, Enlil installed his son
Nannar/Sin in command; the texts speak of him in the list of cities as NU.GIG
("he of the night sky"). There, we believe, the twins Inanna/lshtar and
Utu/Shamash were born—an event marked by associating their father Nannar
with the next zodiacal constellation, Gemini (the Twins). As the god trained
in rocketry, Shamash was assigned the constellation GIR (meaning both
"rocket" and "the crab's claw," or Cancer), followed by Ishtar and the Lion
(Leo), upon whose back she was traditionally depicted.
Fig. 129
The sister of Enlil and Enki, "the nurse" Ninhursag (SUD), was not
neglected: In her charge Enlil put Shuruppak, the medical center of the
Nefilim—an event marked by naming her constellation "The Maid" (Virgo).
While these centers were being established, the completion of Nippur was
followed by the construction of the spaceport of the Nefilim on Earth. The
texts made clear that Nippur was the place where the "words"—commands-
were uttered: There, when "Enlil commanded: 'Towards heaven!' ... that
which shines forth rose like a sky rocket." But the action itself took place
"where Shamash rises," and that place—the "Cape Kennedy" of the Nefilim
—was Sippar, the city in the charge of the Chief of the Eagles, where
multistage rockets were raised within its special enclave, the "sacred
precinct."
As Shamash matured to take command of the Fiery Rockets, and in time
also to become the God of Justice, he was assigned the constellations
Scorpio and Libra (the Scales).
Completing the list of the first seven Cities of the Gods and the
correspondence with the twelve zodiac constellations was Larak, where
Enlil put his son Ninurta in command. The city lists call him PA.BlL.SAG
("great protector"); it is the same name by which the constellation Sagittarius
was called.
•
It would be unrealistic to assume that the first seven Cities of the Gods
were established haphazardly. These "gods," who were capable of space
travel, located the first settlements in accordance with a definite plan,
serving a vital need: to be able to land on Earth and to leave Earth for their
own planet.
What was the master plan?
As we searched for an answer, we asked ourselves a question: What is the
origin of Earth's astronomical and astrological symbol, a circle bisected by a
right-angled cross—the symbol we use to signify "target"?
The symbol goes back to the origins of astronomy and astrology in Sumer
and is identical with the Egyptian hieroglyphic sign for "place":
Is this coincidence, or significant evidence? Did the Nefilim land on Earth by
superimposing on its image or map some kind of "target"?
The Nefilim were strangers to Earth. As they scanned its surface from
space, they must have paid special attention to the mountains and mountain
ranges. These could present hazards during landings and takeoffs, but they
could also serve as navigational landmarks.
If the Nefilim, as they hovered over the Indian Ocean, looked toward the
Land Between the Rivers, which they had selected for their earliest
colonizing efforts, one landmark stood out unchallenged: Mount Ararat.
An extinct volcanic massif, Ararat dominates the Armenian plateau where
the present-day borders of Turkey, Iran, and Soviet Armenia meet. It rises on
the eastern and northern sides to some 3,000 feet above sea level, and on the
northwestern side to 5,000 feet. The whole massif is some twenty-five miles
in diameter, a towering dome sticking out from the surface of Earth.
Other features make it stand out not only from the horizon but also from
high in the skies. First, it is located almost midway between two lakes, Lake
Van and Lake So-Van. Second, two peaks rise from the high massif: Little
Ararat (12,900 feet) and Great Ararat (17,000 feet—well over 5 kilometers).
No other mountains rival the solitary heights of the two peaks, which are
permanently snow-covered. They are like two shining beacons between the
two lakes that, in daylight, act as giant reflectors.
We have reason to believe that the Nefilim selected their landing site by
coordinating a north–south meridian with an unmistakable landmark and a
convenient river location. North of Mesopotamia, the easily identifiable
twin-peaked Ararat would have been the obvious landmark. A meridian
drawn through the center of the twin-peaked Ararat bisected the Euphrates.
That was the target—the site selected for the spaceport. (Fig. 130)
Could one easily land and take off there?
The answer was Yes. The selected site lay in a plain; the mountain ranges
surrounding Mesopotamia were a substantial distance away. The highest ones
(to the east, northeast, and north) would not interfere with a space shuttle
gliding in from the southeast.
Fig. 130
Was the place accessible—could astronauts and materials be brought there
without too much difficulty?
Again, the answer was Yes. The site could be reached overland and, via
the Euphrates River, by waterborne craft.
And one more crucial question: Was there a nearby source of energy, of
fuel for light and power? The answer was an emphatic Yes. The bend in the
Euphrates River where Sippar was to be established was one of the richest
known sources in antiquity of surface bitumens, petroleum products that
seeped up through natural wells and could be collected from the surface
without any deep digging or drilling.
We can imagine Enlil, surrounded by his lieutenants at the spacecraft's
command post, drawing the cross within a circle on the map. "What shall we
call the place?" he may have asked.
"Why not 'Sippar'?" someone might have suggested.
In Near Eastern languages, the name means "bird." Sippar was the place
where the Eagles would come to nest.
How would the space shuttles glide down to Sippar?
We can visualize one of the space navigators pointing out the best route.
On the left they had the Euphrates and the mountainous plateau west of it; on
the right, the Tigris and the Zagros range east of it. If the craft were to
approach Sippar at the easily set angle of 45 degrees to the Ararat meridian,
its path would take it safely between these two hazardous areas. Moreover,
coming in to land at such an angle, it would cross in the south over the rocky
tip of Arabia while at a high altitude, and start its glide over the waters of the
Persian Gulf. Coming and going, the craft would have an unobstructed field
of vision and of communication with Mission Control at Nippur.
Enlil's lieutenant would then make a rough sketch—a triangle of waters
and mountains on each side, pointing like an arrow toward Sippar. An "X"
would mark Nippur, in the center. (Fig. 131)
Fig. 131
Incredible as it may seem, this sketch was not made by us; the design was
drawn on a ceramic object unearthed at Susa, in a stratum dated to about
3200 B.C. It brings to mind the planisphere that described the flight path and
procedures, which was based on 45-degree segments.
The establishment of settlements on Earth by the Nefilim was not a hit-or-
miss effort. All the alternatives were studied, all the resources evaluated, all
the hazards taken into account; moreover, the settlement plan itself was
carefully mapped out so that each site fit into the final pattern, whose purpose
was to outline the landing path to Sippar.
No one has previously attempted to see a master plan in the scattered
Sumerian settlements. But if we look at the first seven cities ever established,
we find that Bad-Tibira, Shuruppak, and Nippur lay on a line running
precisely at a 45-degree angle to the Ararat meridian, and that line crossed
the meridian exactly at Sippar! The other two cities whose sites are known,
Eridu and Larsa, also lay on another straight line that crossed the first line
and the Ararat meridian, also at Sippar.
Taking our cue from the ancient sketch, which made Nippur the center of a
circle, and drawing concentric circles from Nippur through the various
cities, we find that another ancient Sumerian town, Lagash, was located
exactly on one of these circles—on a line equidistant from the 45-degree
line, like the Eridu–Larsa–Sippar line. The location of Lagash mirrors that of
Larsa.
Though the site of LA.RA.AK ("seeing the bright halo") remains unknown,
the logical site for it would be at Point 5, since there logically was a City of
the Gods there, completing the string of cities on the central flight path at
intervals of six beru: Bad-Tibira, Shuruppak, Nippur, Larak, Sippar. (Fig.
132)
The two outside lines, flanking the central line running through Nippur, lay
6 degrees on each side of it, acting as southwest and northeast outlines of the
central flight path. Appropriately, the name LA.AR.SA meant "seeing the red
light"; and LA.AG.ASH meant "seeing the halo at six." The cities along each
line were indeed six beru (approximately sixty kilometers, or thirty-seven
miles) from each other.
This, we believe, was the master plan of the Nefilim. Having selected the
best location for their spaceport (Sippar), they laid out the other settlements
in a pattern outlining the vital flight path to it. In the center they placed
Nippur, where the "bond Heaven–Earth" was located.
•
Neither the original Cities of the Gods nor their remains can ever be seen
by man again—they were all destroyed by the Deluge that later swept over
Earth. But we can learn much about them because it was the sacred duty of
Mesopotamian kings continuously to rebuild the sacred precincts in exactly
the same spot and according to the original plans. The rebuilders stressed
their scrupulous adherence to the original plans in their dedication
inscriptions, as this one (uncovered by Layard) stated:
The everlasting ground plan,
that which for the future
the construction determined
[I have followed].
It is the one which bears
the drawings from the Olden Times
and the writing of the Upper Heaven.
If Lagash, as we suggest, was one of the cities that served as a landing
beacon, then much of the information provided by Gudea in the third
millennium B.C. makes sense. He wrote that when Ninurta instructed him to
rebuild the sacred precinct, an accompanying god gave him the architectural
plans (drawn on a stone tablet), and a goddess (who had "travelled between
Heaven and Earth" in her "chamber") showed him a celestial map and
instructed him on the astronomical alignments of the structure.
In addition to the "divine black bird," the god's "terrible eye" ("the great
beam that subdues the world to its power") and the "world controller"
(whose sound could "reverberate all over") were installed in the sacred
precinct. Finally, when the structure was complete, the "emblem of Utu" was
raised upon it, facing "toward the rising place of Utu"—toward the spaceport
at Sippar. All these beaming objects were important to the spaceport's
operation, for Utu himself "came forth joyfully" to inspect the installations
when completed.
Early Sumerian depictions frequently show massive structures, built in
earliest times of reeds and wood, standing in fields among grazing cattle. The
current assumption that these were stables for cattle is contradicted by the
pillars that are invariably shown protruding from the roofs of such structures.
(Fig. 133a)
The pillars' purpose, as one can see, was to support one or more pairs of
"rings," whose function is unstated. But although these structures were
erected in the fields, one must question whether they were built to shelter
cattle. The Sumerian pictographs (Fig. 133b) depict the word DUR, or TUR
(meaning "abode," "gathering place"), by drawings that undoubtedly
represent the same structures shown on the cylinder seals; but they make
clear that the main feature of the structure was not the "huts" but the antenna
tower. Similar pillars with "rings" were posted at temple entrances, within
the sacred precincts of the gods, and not only out in the countryside. (Fig.
133c)
Fig. 132
Were these objects antennas attached to broadcasting equipment? Were the
pairs of rings radar emitters, placed in the fields to guide the incoming
shuttlecraft? Were the eyelike pillars scanning devices, the "all-seeing eyes"
of the gods of which many texts have spoken?
We know that the equipment to which these various devices were
connected was portable, for some Sumerian seals depict boxlike "divine
objects" being transported by boat or mounted on pack animals, which
carried the objects farther inland once the boats had docked. (Fig. 134)
These "black boxes," when we see what they looked like, bring to mind
the Ark of the Covenant built by Moses under God's instructions. The chest
was to be made of wood, overlaid with gold both inside and outside—two
electricity-conducting surfaces were insulated by the wood between them. A
kapporeth, also made of gold, was to. be placed above the chest and held up
by two cherubim cast of solid gold. The nature of the kapporeth (meaning,
scholars speculate, "covering") is not clear; but this verse from Exodus
suggests its purpose: "And I will address thee from above the Kapporeth,
from between the two Cberubim."
The implication that the Ark of the Covenant was principally a
communications box, electrically operated, is enhanced by the instructions
concerning its portability. It was to be carried by means of wooden staffs
passed through four golden rings. No one was to touch the chest proper; and
when one Israelite did touch it, he was killed instantly—as if by a charge of
high-voltage electricity.
Such apparently supernatural equipment—which made it possible to
communicate with a deity though the deity was physically somewhere else-
became objects of veneration, "sacred cult symbols." Temples at Lagash, Ur,
Mari, and other ancient sites included among their devotional objects "eye
idols." The most outstanding example was found at an "eye temple" at Tell
Brak, in northwestern Mesopotamia. This fourth-millennium B.C. temple was
so named not only because hundreds of "eye" symbols were unearthed there
but mainly because the temple's inner sanctum had only one altar, on which a
huge stone "double-eye" symbol was displayed. (Fig. 135)
In all probability, it was a simulation of the actual divine object—
Ninurta's "terrible eye," or the one at Enlil's Mission Control Center at
Nippur, about which the ancient scribe reported: "His raised Eye scans the
land.... His raised Beam searches the land."
The flat plain of Mesopotamia necessitated, it seems, the artificial raising
of platforms on which the space-related equipment was to be placed. Texts
and pictorial depictions leave no doubt that the structures ranged from the
earliest field huts to the later staged platforms, reached by staircases and
sloped ramps that led from a broad lower stage to a narrower upper one, and
so on. At the top of the ziggurat an actual residence for the god was built,
surrounded by a flat, walled courtyard to house his "bird" and "weapons." A
ziggurat depicted on a cylinder seal not only shows the customary stage-
upon-stage construction, it also has two "ring antennas" whose height appears
to have equaled three stages. (Fig. 136)
Fig. 133
Fig. 134
Fig. 135
Fig. 136
Marduk claimed that the ziggurat and temple compound at Babylon (the
E.SAG.IL) had been built under his own instructions, also in accordance
with the "writing of Upper Heaven." A tablet (known as the Smith Tablet,
after its decipherer), analyzed by Andre Parrot (Ziggurats et Tour de Babel)
established that the seven-stage ziggurat was a perfect square, with the first
stage or base having sides of 15 gar each. Each successive stage was
smaller in area and in height, except the last stage (the god's residence),
which was of a greater height. The total height, however, was again equal to
15 gar, so that the complete structure was not only a perfect square but a
perfect cube as well.
The gar employed in these measurements was equivalent to 12 short cubits
—approximately 6 meters, or 20 feet. Two scholars, H. G. Wood and L. C.
Stecchini, have shown that the Sumerian sexagesimal base, the number 60,
determined all the primary measurements of Mesopotamian ziggurats. Thus
each side measured 3 by 60 cubits at its base, and the total was 60 gar. (Fig.
137)
What factor determined the height of each stage? Stecchini discovered that
if he multiplied the height of the first stage (5.5 gar) by double cubits, the
result was 33, or the approximate latitude of Babylon (32.5 degrees North).
Similarly calculated, the second stage raised the angle of observation to 51
degrees, and each of the succeeding four stages raised it by another 6
degrees. The seventh stage thus stood atop a platform raised to 75 degrees
above the horizon at Babylon's geographic latitude. This final stage added 15
degrees—letting the observer look straight up, at a 90-degree angle.
Stecchini concluded that each stage acted like a stage of an astronomical
observatory, with a predetermined elevation relative to the arc of the sky.
There may, of course, have been more "hidden" considerations in these
measurements. While the elevation of 33 degrees was not too accurate for
Babylon, it was precise for Sippar. Was there a relationship between the 6-
degree elevation at each of four stages and the 6-beru distances between the
Cities of the Gods? Were the seven stages somehow related to the location of
the first seven settlements, or to Earth's position as the seventh planet?
G. Martiny (Astronomisches zur babylonischen Turm) showed how these
features of the ziggurat suited it for celestial observations, and that the
topmost stage of the Esagila was oriented toward the planet Shupa (which
we have identified as Pluto) and the constellation Aries. (Fig. 138)
But were the ziggurats raised solely to observe the stars and planets, or
were they also meant to serve the spacecraft of the Nefilim? All the ziggurats
were oriented so that their corners pointed exactly north, south, east, and
west. As a result, their sides ran precisely at 45-degree angles to the four
cardinal directions. This meant that a space shuttle coming in for a landing
could follow certain sides of the ziggurat exactly along the flight path—and
reach Sippar without difficulty!
The Akkadian/Babylonian name for these structures, zukiratu, connoted
"tube of divine spirit." The Sumerians called the ziggurats ESH; the term
denoted "supreme" or "most high"—as indeed these structures were. It could
also denote a numerical entity relating to the "measuring" aspect of the
ziggurats. And it also meant "a heat source" ("fire" in Akkadian and
Hebrew).
Even scholars who have approached the subject without our "space"
interpretation could not escape the conclusion that the ziggurats had some
purpose other than to make the god's abode a "high-rise" building. Samuel N.
Kramer summed up the scholastic consensus: "The ziggurat, the stagetower,
which became the hallmark of Mesopotamian temple architecture ... was
intended to serve as a connecting link, both real and symbolic, between the
gods in heaven and the mortals on earth,"
Fig. 137
Fig. 138
We have shown, however, that the true function of these structures was to
connect the gods in Heaven with the gods—not the mortals—on Earth.