
12
•
THE CREATION OF MAN
The assertion, first recorded and transmitted by the Sumerians, that "Man"
was created by the Nefilim, appears at first sight to clash both with the theory
of evolution and with the Judeo-Christian tenets based on the Bible. But in
fact, the information contained in the Sumerian texts—and only that
information—can affirm both the validity of the theory of evolution and the
truth of the biblical tale—and show that there really is no conflict at all
between the two.
In the epic "When the gods as men," in other specific texts, and in passing
references, the Sumerians described Man as both a deliberate creature of the
gods and a link in the evolutionary chain that began with the celestial events
described in the "Epic of Creation." Holding firm to the belief that the
creation of Man was preceded by an era during which only the Nefilim were
upon Earth, the Sumerian texts recorded instance after instance (for example,
the incident between Enlil and Ninlil) of events that had taken place "when
Man had not yet been created, when Nippur was inhabited by the gods
alone." At the same time, the texts also described the creation of Earth and
the development of plant and animal life upon it, in terms that conform to the
current evolutionary theories.
The Sumerian texts state that when the Nefilim first came to Earth, the arts
of grain cultivation, fruit planting, and cattle raising had not yet extended to
Earth. The biblical account likewise places the creation of Man in the sixth
"day" or phase of the evolutionary process. The Book of Genesis, too, asserts
that at an earlier evolutionary stage:
No plant of the cleared field was yet on Earth,
No herb that is planted had yet been grown....
And Man was not yet there to work the soil.
All the Sumerian texts assert that the gods created Man to do their work.
Putting the explanation in words uttered by Marduk, the Creation epic reports
the decision:
I will produce a lowly Primitive;
"Man" shall be his name.
I will create a Primitive Worker;
He will be charged with the service of the gods,
that they might have their ease.
The very terms by which the Sumerians and Akkadians called "Man"
bespoke his status and purpose: He was a lulu ("primitive"), a lulu amelu
("primitive worker"), an awilum ("laborer"). That Man was created to be a
servant of the gods did not strike the ancient peoples as a peculiar idea at all.
In biblical times, the deity was "Lord," "Sovereign," "King," "Ruler,"
"Master." The term that is commonly translated as "worship" was in fact
avod ("work"). Ancient and biblical Man did not "worship" his god; he
worked for him.
No sooner had the biblical Deity, like the gods in Sumerian accounts,
created Man, than he planted a garden and assigned Man to work there:
And the Lord God took the "Man"
and placed him in the garden of Eden
to till it and to tend it.
Later on, the Bible describes the Deity "strolling in the garden in the
breeze of the day," now that the new being was there to tend the Garden of
Eden. How far is this version from the Sumerian texts that describe how the
gods clamored for workers so that they could rest and relax?
In the Sumerian versions, the decision to create Man was adopted by the
gods in their Assembly. Significantly, the Book of Genesis—purportedly
exalting the achievements of a sole Deity—uses the plural Elohim (literally,
"deities") to denote "God," and reports an astonishing remark:
And Elohim said:
"Let us make Man in our image,
after our likeness."
Whom did the sole but plural Deity address, and who were the "us" in
whose plural image and plural likeness Man was to be made? The Book of
Genesis does not provide the answer. Then, when Adam and Eve ate of the
fruit of the Tree of Knowing, Elohim issued a warning to the same unnamed
colleagues: "Behold, Man has become as one of us, to know good and evil."
Since the biblical story of Creation, like the other tales of beginnings in
Genesis, stems from Sumerian origins, the answer is obvious. Condensing the
many gods into a single Supreme Deity, the biblical tale is but an edited
version of the Sumerian reports of the discussions in the Assembly of the
Gods.
The Old Testament took pains to make clear that Man was neither a god
nor from the heavens. "The Heavens are the Heavens of the Lord, unto
Mankind Earth He hath given." The new being was called "the Adam"
because he was created of the adama, the Earth's soil. He was, in other
words, "the Earthling."
Lacking only certain "knowing" and a divine span of life, the Adam was in
all other respects created in the image (selem) and likeness (dmut) of his
Creator(s). The use of both terms in the text was meant to leave no doubt that
Man was similar to the God(s) both physically and emotionally, externally
and internally.
In all ancient pictorial depictions of gods and men, this physical likeness
is evident. Although the biblical admonition against the worship of pagan
images gave rise to the notion that the Hebrew God had neither image nor
likeness, not only the Genesis tale but other biblical reports attest to the
contrary. The God of the ancient Hebrews could be seen face-to-face, could
be wrestled with, could be heard and spoken to; he had a head and feet,
hands and fingers, and a waist. The biblical God and his emissaries looked
like men and acted like men—because men were created to look like and act
like the gods.
But in this very simplicity lies a great mystery. How could a new creature
possibly be a virtual physical, mental, and emotional replica of the Nefilim?
How, indeed, was Man created?
The Western world was long wedded to the notion that, created
deliberately, Man was put upon Earth to subdue it and have dominion over
all other creatures. Then, in November 1859, an English naturalist by the
name of Charles Darwin published a treatise called On the Origin of
Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured
Races in the Struggle for Life. Summing up nearly thirty years of research,
the book added to earlier thoughts about natural evolution the concept of
natural selection as a consequence of the struggle of all species—of plant
and animal alike—for existence.
The Christian world had been jostled earlier when, from 1788 on, noted
geologists had begun to express their belief that Earth was of great antiquity,
much, much greater than the roughly 5,500 years of the Hebrew calendar. Nor
was the concept of evolution as such the explosive: Earlier scholars had
noted such a process, and Greek scholars as far back as the fourth century
B.C. compiled data on the evolution of animal and plant life.
Darwin's shattering bombshell was the conclusion that all living things—
Man included—were products of evolution. Man, contrary to the then-held
belief, was not generated spontaneously.
The initial reaction of the Church was violent. But as the scientific facts
regarding Earth's true age, evolution, genetics, and other biological and
anthropological studies came to light, the Church's criticism was muted. It
seemed at last that the very words of the Old Testament made the tale of the
Old Testament indefensible; for how could a God who has no corporal body
and who is universally alone say, "Let us make Man in our image, after our
likeness?"
But are we really nothing more than "naked apes"? Is the monkey just an
evolutionary arm's length away from us, and the tree shrew just a human who
has yet to lose his tail and stand erect?
As we showed at the very beginning of this book, modern scientists have
come to question the simple theories. Evolution can explain the general
course of events that caused life and life's forms to develop on Earth, from
the simplest one-celled creature to Man. But evolution cannot account for the
appearance of Homo sapiens, which happened virtually overnight in terms of
the millions of years evolution requires, and with no evidence of earlier
stages that would indicate a gradual change from Homo erectus.
The hominid of the genus Homo is a product of evolution. But Homo
sapiens is the product of some sudden, revolutionary event. He appeared
inexplicably some 300,000 years ago, millions of years too soon.
The scholars have no explanation. But we do. The Sumerian and
Babylonian texts do. The Old Testament does.
Homo sapiens—modern Man—was brought about by the ancient gods.
•
The Mesopotamian texts, fortunately, provide a clear statement regarding
the time when Man was created. The story of the toil and ensuing mutiny of
the Anunnaki informs us that "for 40 periods they suffered the work, day and
night"; the long years of their toil are dramatized by repetitious verses.
For 10 periods they suffered the toil;
For 20 periods they suffered the toil;
For 30 periods they suffered the toil;
For 40 periods they suffered the toil.
The ancient text uses the term ma to denote "period," and most scholars
have translated this as "year." But the term had the connotation of "something
that completes itself and then repeats itself." To men on Earth, one year
equals one complete orbit of Earth around the Sun. As we have already
shown, the orbit of the Nefilim's planet equaled a shar, or 3,600 Earth years.
Forty shar's, or 144,000 Earth years, after their landing, the Anunnaki
protested, "No more!" If the Nefilim first landed on Earth, as we have
concluded, some 450,000 years ago, then the creation of Man took place
some 300,000 years ago!
The Nefilim did not create the mammals or the primates or the hominids.
"The Adam" of the Bible was not the genus Homo, but the being who is our
ancestor—the first Homo sapiens. It is modern Man as we know him that the
Nefilim created.
The key to understanding this crucial fact lies in the tale of a slumbering
Enki, aroused to be informed that the gods had decided to form an adamu,
and that it was his task to find the means. He replied:
"The creature whose name you uttered–
IT EXISTS!"
and he added: "Bind upon it"-on the creature that already exists—"the image
of the gods."
Here, then, is the answer to the puzzle: The Nefilim did not "create" Man
out of nothing; rather, they took an existing creature and manipulated it, to
"bind upon it" the "image of the gods."
Man is the product of evolution; but modern Man, Homo sapiens, is the
product of the "gods." For, some time circa 300,000 years ago, the Nefilim
took ape-man (Homo erectus) and implanted on him their own image and
likeness.
Evolution and the Near Eastern tales of Man's creation are not at all in
conflict. Rather, they explain and complement each other. For without the
creativity of the Nefilim, modern Man would still be millions years away on
the evolutionary tree.
•
Let us transport ourselves back in time, and try to visualize the
circumstances and the events as they unfolded.
The great interglacial stage that began about 435,000 years ago, and its
warm climate, brought about a proliferation of food and animals. It also
speeded up the appearance and spread of an advanced manlike ape, Homo
erectus.
As the Nefilim looked about them, they saw not only the predominant
mammals but also the primates—among them the manlike apes. Is it not
possible that the roaming bands of Homo erectus were lured to come close to
observe the fiery objects rising to the sky. Is it not possible that the Nefilim
observed, encountered, even captured some of these interesting primates?
That the Nefilim and the manlike apes did meet is attested to by several
ancient texts. A Sumerian tale dealing with the primordial times states:
When Mankind was created,
They knew not the eating of bread,
Knew not the dressing in garments;
Ate plants with their mouth like sheep;
Drank water from a ditch.
Such an animal-like "human" being is also described in the "Epic of
Gilgamesh." That text tells what Enkidu, the one "born on the steppes," was
like before he became civilized:
Shaggy with hair is his whole body,
he is endowed with head-hair like a woman....
He knows neither people nor land;
Garbed he is like one of the green fields;
With gazelles he feeds on grass;
With the wild beasts he jostles
at the watering place;
With the teeming creatures in the water
his heart delights.
Not only does the Akkadian text describe an animal-like man; it also
describes an encounter with such a being:
Now a hunter, one who traps,
faced him at the watering place.
When the hunter saw him,
his face became motionless....
His heart was disturbed, overclouded his face,
for woe had entered his belly.
There was more to it than mere fear after the hunter beheld "the savage,"
this "barbarous fellow from the depths of the steppe"; for this "savage" also
interfered with the hunter's pursuits:
He filled the pits that I had dug,
he tore up my traps which I had set;
the beasts and creatures of the steppe
he has made slip through my hands.
We can ask for no better description of an ape-man: hairy, shaggy, a
roaming nomad who "knows neither people nor land," garbed in leaves, "like
one of the green fields," feeding on grass, and living among the animals. Yet
he is not without substantial intelligence, for he knows how to tear up the
traps and fill up the pits dug to catch the animals. In other words, he
protected his animal friends from-being caught by the alien hunters. Many
cylinder seals have been found that depict this shaggy ape-man among his
animal friends. (Fig. 149)
Fig. 149
Then, faced with the need for manpower, resolved to obtain a Primitive
Worker, the Nefilim saw a ready-made solution: to domesticate a suitable
animal.
The "animal" was available—but Homo erectus posed a problem. On the
one hand, he was too intelligent and wild to become simply a docile beast of
work. On the other hand, he was not really suited to the task. His physique
had to be changed—he had to be able to grasp and use the tools of the
Nefilim, walk and bend like them so that he could replace the gods in the
fields and in the mines. He had to have better "brains"—not like those of the
gods but enough to understand speech and commands and the tasks allotted to
him. He needed enough cleverness and understanding to be an obedient and
useful amelu—a serf.
If, as the ancient evidence and modern science seem to confirm, life on
Earth germinated from life on the Twelfth Planet, then evolution on Earth
should have proceeded as it had on the Twelfth Planet. Undoubtedly there
were mutations, variations, accelerations, and retardations caused by
different local conditions; but the same genetic codes, the same "chemistry of
life" found in all living plants and animals on Earth would also have guided
the development of life forms on Earth in the same general direction as on the
Twelfth Planet.
Observing the various forms of life on Earth, the Nefilim and their chief
scientist, Ea, needed little time to realize what had happened: During the
celestial collision, their planet had seeded Earth with its life. Therefore, the
being that was available was really akin to the Nefilim—though in a less
evolved form.
A gradual process of domestication through generations of breeding and
selection would not do. What was needed was a quick process, one that
would permit "mass production" of the new workers. So the problem was
posed to Ea; who saw the answer at once: to "imprint" the image of the gods
on the being that already existed.
The process that Ea recommended in order to achieve a quick evolutionary
advancement of Homo erectus was, we believe, genetic manipulation.
We now know that the complex biological process whereby a living
organism reproduces itself, creating progeny that resemble their parents, is
made possible by the genetic code. All living organisms—a threadworm, a
fern tree, or Man—contain in their cells chromosomes, minute rodlike bodies
within each cell that hold the complete hereditary instructions for that
particular organism. As the male cell (pollen, sperm) fertilizes the female
cell, the two sets of chromosomes combine and then divide to form new cells
that hold the complete hereditary characteristics of their parent cells.
Artificial insemination, even of a female human egg, is now possible. The
real challenge lies in cross-fertilization between different families within the
same species, and even between different species. Modern science has come
a long way from the development of the first hybrid corns, or the mating of
Alaskan dogs with wolves, or the "creation" of the mule (the artificial mating
of a mare and a donkey), to the ability to manipulate Man's own
reproduction.
A process called cloning (from the Greek word klon—"twig") applies to
animals the same principle as that of taking a cutting from a plant to
reproduce hundreds of similar plants. The technique as applied to animals
was first demonstrated in England, where Dr. John Gordon replaced the
nucleus of a fertilized frog's egg with the nuclear material from another cell
of the same frog. The successful formation of normal tadpoles demonstrated
that the egg proceeds to develop and subdivide and create progeny no matter
where it obtains the correct set of matching chromosomes.
Experiments at the Institute of Society, Ethics and Life Sciences at
Hastings-on-Hudson, New York, have shown that techniques already exist for
cloning human beings. It is now possible to take the nuclear material of any
human cell (not necessarily from the sex organs) and, by introducing its
twenty-three sets of complete chromosomes into the female ovum, lead to the
conception and birth of a "predetermined" individual. In normal conception,
"father" and "mother" chromosome sets merge and then must split to remain
at twenty-three chromosome pairs, leading to chance combinations. But in
cloning the offspring is an exact replica of the source of the unsplit set of
chromosomes. We already possess, according to Dr. W. Gaylin of the
Institute, the "awful knowledge to make exact copies of human beings"—a
limitless number of Hitlers or Mozarts or Einsteins (if we had preserved
their cell nuclei).
But the art of genetic engineering is not limited to one process.
Researchers in many countries have perfected a process called "cell fusion,"
making it possible to fuse cells rather than combine chromosomes within a
single cell. As a result of such a process, cells from different sources can be
fused into one "super cell," holding within itself two nuclei and a double set
of the paired chromosomes. When this cell splits, the mixture of nuclei and
chromosomes may split in a pattern different from that of each cell before the
fusion. The result can be two new cells, each genetically complete, but each
with a brand-new set of genetic codes, completely garbled as far as the
ancestor cells were concerned.
This means that cells from hitherto incompatible living organisms—say,
that of a chicken and that of a mouse-can be fused to form new cells with
brand-new genetic mixes that produce new animals that are neither chickens
nor mice as we know them. Further refined, the process can also permit us to
select which traits of one life form shall be imparted to the combined or
"fused" cell.
This has led to the development of the wide field of "genetic transplant." It
is now possible to pick up from certain bacteria a single specific gene and
introduce that gene into an animal or human cell, giving the offspring an
added characteristic.
•
We should assume that the Nefilim—being capable of space travel
450,000 years ago—were also equally advanced, compared to us today, in
the field of life sciences. We should also assume that they were aware of the
various alternatives by which two preselected sets of chromosomes could be
combined to obtain a predetermined genetic result; and that whether the
process was akin to cloning, cell fusion, genetic transplant, or methods as yet
unknown to us, they knew these processes and could carry them out, not only
in the laboratory flask but also with living organisms.
We find a reference to such a mixing of two life-sources in the ancient
texts. According to Berossus, the deity Belus ("lord")—also called Deus
("god")—brought forth various "hideous Beings, which were produced of a
two-fold principle."
Men appeared with two wings, some with four and two faces. They had
one body but two heads, the one of a man, the other of a woman. They
were likewise in their several organs both male and female.
Other human figures were to be seen with the legs and horns of goats.
Some had horses' feet; others had the limbs of a horse behind, but in
front were fashioned like men, resembling hippocentaurs. Bulls
likewise bred there with the heads of men; and dogs with fourfold
bodies, and the tails of fishes. Also horses with the heads of dogs; men
too and other animals with the heads and bodies of horses and the tails
of fishes. In short, there were creatures with the limbs of every species
of animals....
Of all these were preserved delineations in the temple of Belus at
Babylon.
•
The tale's baffling details may hold an important truth. It is quite
conceivable that before resorting to the creation of a being in their own
image, the Nefilim attempted to come up with a "manufactured servant" by
experimenting with other alternatives: the creation of a hybrid ape-man-
animal. Some of these artificial creatures may have survived for a while but
were certainly unable to reproduce. The enigmatic bull-men and lion-men
(sphinxes) that adorned temple sites in the ancient Near East may not have
been just figments of an artist's imagination but actual creatures that came out
of the biological laboratories of the Nefilim—unsuccessful experiments
commemorated in art and by statues. (Fig. 150)
Fig. 150
Sumerian texts, too, speak of deformed humans created by Enki and the
Mother Goddess (Ninhursag) in the course of their efforts to fashion a perfect
Primitive Worker. One text reports that Ninhursag, whose task it was to "bind
upon the mixture the mold of the gods," got drunk and "called over to Enki,"
"How good or how bad is Man's body?
As my heart prompts me,
I can make its fate good or bad."
Mischievously, then, according to this text—but probably unavoidably, as
part of a trial-and-error process—Ninhursag produced a Man who could not
hold back his urine, a woman who could not bear children, a being who had
neither male nor female organs. All in all, six deformed or deficient humans
were brought forth by Ninhursag. Enki was held responsible for the imperfect
creation of a man with diseased eyes, trembling hands, a sick liver, a failing
heart; a second one with sicknesses attendant upon old age; and so on.
But finally the perfect Man was achieved—the one Enki named Adapa; the
Bible, Adam; our scholars, Homo sapiens. This being was so much akin to
the gods that one text even went so far as to point out that the Mother
Goddess gave to her creature, Man, "a skin as the skin of a god"—a smooth,
hairless body, quite different from that of the shaggy ape-man.
With this final product, the Nefilim were genetically compatible with the
daughters of Man and able to marry them and have children by them. But such
compatibility could exist only if Man had developed from the same "seed of
life" as the Nefilim. This, indeed, is what the ancient texts attest to.
Man, in the Mesopotamian concept, as in the biblical one, was made of a
mixture of a godly element—a god's blood or its "essence"—and the "clay"
of Earth. Indeed, the very term lulu for "Man," while conveying the sense of
"primitive," literally meant "one who has been mixed." Called upon to
fashion a man, the Mother Goddess "Washed her hands, pinched off clay,
mixed it in the steppe." (It is fascinating to note here the sanitary precautions
taken by the goddess. She "washed her hands." We encounter such clinical
measures and procedures in other creation texts as well.)
The use of earthly "clay" mixed with divine "blood" to create the
prototype of Man is firmly established by the Mesopotamian texts. One,
relating how Enki was called upon to "bring to pass some great work of
Wisdom"—of scientific know-how—states that Enki saw no great problem in
fulfilling the task of "fashioning servants for the gods." "It can be done!" he
announced. He then gave these instructions to the Mother Goddess:
"Mix to a core the clay
from the Basement of Earth,
just above the Abzu—
and shape it into the form of a core.
I shall provide good, knowing young gods
who will bring that clay to the right condition."
The second chapter of Genesis offers this technical version:
And Yahweh, Elohim, fashioned the Adam
of the clay of the soil;
and He blew in his nostrils the breath of life,
and the Adam turned into a living Soul.
The Hebrew term commonly translated as "soul" is nephesh, that elusive
"spirit" that animates a living creature and seemingly abandons it when it
dies. By no coincidence, the Pentateuch (the first five books of the Old
Testament) repeatedly exhorted against the shedding of human blood and the
eating of animal blood "because the blood is the nephesh." The biblical
versions of the creation of Man thus equate nephesh ("spirit," "soul") and
blood.
The Old Testament offers another clue to the role of blood in Man's
creation. The term adama (after which the name Adam was coined)
originally meant not just any earth or soil, but specifically dark-red soil. Like
the parallel Akkadian word adamatu ("dark-red earth"), the Hebrew term
adama and the Hebrew name for the color red (adom) stem from the words
for blood: adamu, dam. When the Book of Genesis termed the being created
by God "the Adam," it employed a favorite Sumerian linguistic play of
double meanings. "The Adam" could mean "the one of the earth" (Earthling),
"the one made of the dark-red soil," and "the one made of blood."
The same relationship between the essential element of living creatures
and blood exists in Mesopotamian accounts of Man's creation. The hospital-
like house where Ea and the Mother Goddess went to bring Man forth was
called the House of Shimti; most scholars translate this as "the house where
fates are determined." But the term Shimti clearly stems from the Sumerian
SHI.IM.TI, which, taken syllable by syllable, means "breath-wind-life." Bit
Shimti meant, literally, "the house where the wind of life is breathed in."
This is virtually identical to the biblical statement.
Indeed, the Akkadian word employed in Mesopotamia to translate the
Sumerian SHI.IM.TI was napishtu—the exact parallel of the biblical term
nephesh. And the nephesh or napishtu was an elusive "something" in the
blood.
While the Old Testament offered only meager clues, Mesopotamian texts
were quite explicit on the subject. Not only do they state that blood was
required for the mixture of which Man was fashioned; they specified that it
had to be the blood of a god, divine blood.
When the gods decided to create Man, their leader announced: "Blood
will I amass, bring bones into being." Suggesting that the blood be taken from
a specific god, "Let primitives be fashioned after his pattern," Ea said.
Selecting the god,
Out of his blood they fashioned Mankind;
imposed on it the service, let free the gods....
It was a work beyond comprehension.
According to the epic tale "When gods as men," the gods then called the
Birth Goddess (the Mother Goddess, Ninhursag) and asked her to perform
the task:
While the Birth Goddess is present,
Let the Birth Goddess fashion offspring.
While the Mother of the Gods is present,
Let the Birth Goddess fashion a Lulu;
Let the worker carry the toil of the gods.
Let her create a Lulu Amelu,
Let him bear the yoke.
In a parallel Old Babylonian text named "Creation of Man by the Mother
Goddess," the gods call upon "The Midwife of the gods, the Knowing Mami"
and tell her:
Thou art the mother-womb,
The one who Mankind can create.
Create then Lulu, let him bear the yoke!
At this point, the text "When gods as men" and parallel texts turn to a
detailed description of the actual creation of Man. Accepting the "job," the
goddess (here named NIN.TI—"lady who gives life") spelled out some
requirements, including some chemicals ("bitumens of the Abzu"), to be used
for "purification," and "the clay of the Abzu."
Whatever these materials were, Ea had no problem understanding the
requirements; accepting, he said:
"I will prepare a purifying bath.
Let one god be bled....
From his flesh and blood,
let Ninti mix the clay."
To shape a man from the mixed clay, some feminine assistance, some
pregnancy or childbearing aspects were also needed. Enki offered the
services of his own spouse:
Ninki, my goddess-spouse,
will be the one for labor.
Seven goddesses-of-birth
will be near, to assist.
Following the mixing of the "blood" and "clay," the childbearing phase
would complete the bestowal of a divine "imprint" on the creature.
The new-born's fate thou shalt pronounce;
Ninki would fix upon it the image of the gods;
And what it will be is "Man."
Depictions on Assyrian seals may well have been intended as illustrations
for these texts—showing how the Mother Goddess (her symbol was the
cutter of the umbilical cord) and Ea (whose original symbol was the
crescent) were preparing the mixtures, reciting the incantations, urging each
other to proceed. (Figs. 151, 152)
The involvement of Enki's spouse, Ninki in the creation of the first
successful specimen of Man reminds us of the tale of Adapa, which we
discussed in an earlier chapter:
In those days, in those years,
The Wise One of Eridu, Ea,
created him as a model of men.
Scholars have surmised that references to Adapa as a "son" of Ea implied
that the god loved this human so much that he adopted him. But in the same
text Anu refers to Adapa as "the human offspring of Enki." It appears that the
involvement of Enki's spouse in the process of creating Adapa, the "model
Adam," did create some genealogical relationship between the new Man and
his god: It was Ninki who was pregnant with Adapa!
Fig. 151
Fig. 152
Ninti blessed the new being and presented him to Ea. Some seals show a
goddess, flanked by the Tree of Life and laboratory flasks, holding up a
newborn being. (Fig. 153)
Fig. 153
The being that was thus produced, which is repeatedly referred to in
Mesopotamian texts as a "model Man" or a "mold," was apparently the right
creature, for the gods then clamored for duplicates. This seemingly
unimportant detail, however, throws light not only on the process by which
Mankind was "created," but also on the otherwise conflicting information
contained in the Bible.
According to the first chapter of Genesis:
Elohim created the Adam in His image—
in the image of Elohim created He him.
Male and female created He them.
Chapter 5, which is called the Book of the Genealogies of Adam, states
that:
On the day that Elohim created Adam,
in the likeness of Elohim did He make him.
Male and female created He them,
and He blessed them, and called them "Adam"
on the very day of their creation.
In the same breath, we are told that the Deity created, in his likeness and
his image, only a single being, "the Adam," and in apparent contradiction,
that both a male and a female were created simultaneously. The contradiction
seems sharper still in the second chapter of Genesis, which specifically
reports that the Adam was alone for a while, until the Deity put him to sleep
and fashioned Woman from his rib.
The contradiction, which has puzzled scholars and theologians alike,
disappears once we realize that the biblical texts were a condensation of the
original Sumerian sources. These sources inform us that after trying to
fashion a Primitive Worker by "mixing" apemen with animals, the gods
concluded that the only mixture that would work would be between apemen
and the Nefilim themselves. After several unsuccessful attempts, a
"model"—Adapa/Adam—was made. There was, at first, only a single Adam.
Once Adapa/Adam proved to be the right creature, he was used as the
genetic model or "mold" for the creation of duplicates, and those duplicates
were not only male, but male and female. As we showed earlier, the biblical
"rib" from which Woman was fashioned was a play on words on the
Sumerian TI ("rib" and "life")—confirming that Eve was made of Adam's
"life's essence."
•
The Mesopotamian texts provide us with an eye-witness report of the first
production of the duplicates of Adam.
The instructions of Enki were followed. In the House of Shimti—where
the breath of life is "blown in"—Enki, the Mother Goddess, and fourteen
birth goddesses assembled. A god's "essence" was obtained, the "purifying
bath" prepared. "Ea cleaned the clay in her presence; he kept reciting the
incantation."
The god who purifies the Napishtu, Ea, spoke up.
Seated before her, he was prompting her.
After she had recited her incantation,
She put her hand out to the clay.
We are now privy to the detailed process of Man's mass creation. With
fourteen birth goddesses present,
Ninti nipped off fourteen pieces of clay;
Seven she deposited on the right,
Seven she deposited on the left.
Between them she placed the mould.
. . . the hair she ...
. . . the cutter of the umbilical cord.
It is evident that the birth goddesses were divided into two groups. "The
wise and learned, twice-seven birth goddesses had assembled," the text goes
on to explain. Into their wombs the Mother Goddess deposited the "mixed
clay." There are hints of a surgical procedure—the removal or shaving off of
hair, the readying of a surgical instrument, a cutter. Now there was nothing to
do but wait:
The birth goddesses were kept together.
Ninti sat counting the months.
The fateful 10th month was approaching;
The 10th month arrived;
The period of opening the womb had elapsed.
Her face radiated understanding:
She covered her head, performed the midwifery.
Her waist she girdled, pronounced the blessing.
She drew a shape; in the mould was life.
The drama of Man's creation, it appears, was compounded by a late birth.
The "mixture" of "clay" and "blood" was used to induce pregnancy in
fourteen birth goddesses. But nine months passed, and the tenth month
commenced. "The period of opening the womb had elapsed." Understanding
what was called for, the Mother Goddess "performed the midwifery." That
she engaged in some surgical operation emerges more clearly from a parallel
text (in spite of its fragmentation):
Ninti ... counts the months....
The destined 10th month they called;
The Lady Whose Hand Opens came.
With the ... she opened the womb.
Her face brightened with joy.
Her head was covered;
... made an opening;
That which was in the womb came forth.
Overcome with joy, the Mother Goddess let out a cry.
"I have created!
My hands have made it!"
•
How was the creation of Man accomplished?
The text "When the gods as men" contains a passage whose purpose was to
explain why the "blood" of a god had to be mixed into the "clay." The
"divine" element required was not simply the dripping blood of a god, but
something more basic and lasting. The god that was selected, we are told,
had TE.E.MA—a term the leading authorities on the text (W. G. Lambert and
A. R. Millard of Oxford University) translate as "personality." But the
ancient term is much more specific; it literally means "that which houses that
which binds the memory." Further on, the same term appears in the Akkadian
version as etemu, which is translated as "spirit."
In both instances we are dealing with that "something" in the blood of the
god that was the repository of his individuality. All these, we feel certain,
are but roundabout ways of stating that what Ea was after, when he put the
god's blood through a series of "purifying baths," was the god's genes.
The purpose of mixing this divine element thoroughly with the earthly
element was also spelled out:
In the clay, god and Man shall be bound,
to a unity brought together;
So that to the end of days
the Flesh and the Soul
which in a god have ripened—
that Soul in a blood-kinship be bound;
As its Sign life shall proclaim.
So that this not be forgotten,
Let the "Soul" in a blood-kinship be bound.
These are strong words, little understood by scholars. The text states that
the god's blood was mixed into the clay so as to bind god and Man
genetically "to the end of days" so that both the flesh ("image") and the soul
("likeness") of the gods would become imprinted upon Man in a kinship of
blood that could never be severed.
The "Epic of Gilgamesh" reports that when the gods decided to create a
double for the partly divine Gilgamesh, the Mother Goddess mixed "clay"
with the "essence" of the god Ninurta. Later on in the text, Enkidu's mighty
strength is attributed to his having in him the "essence of Anu," an element he
acquired through Ninurta, the grandson of Anu.
The Akkadian term kisir refers to an "essence," a "concentration" that the
gods of the heavens possessed. E. Ebeling summed up the efforts to
understand the exact meaning of ki ir by stating that as "Essence, or some
nuance of the term, it could well be applied to deities as well as to missiles
from Heaven." E. A. Speiser concurred that the term also implied "something
that came down from Heaven." It carried the connotation, he wrote, "as
would be indicated by the use of the term in medicinal contexts."
We are back to a simple, single word of translation: gene.
The evidence of the ancient texts, Mesopotamian as well as biblical,
suggests that the process adopted for merging two sets of genes—those of a
god and those of Homo erectus—involved the use of male genes as the
divine element and female genes as the earthly element.
Repeatedly asserting that the Deity created Adam in his image and in his
likeness, the Book of Genesis later describes the birth of Adam's son Seth in
the following words:
And Adam lived a hundred and thirty years,
and had an offspring
in his likeness and after his image;
and he called his name Seth.
The terminology is identical to that used to describe the creation of Adam
by the Deity. But Seth was certainly born to Adam by a biological process—
the fertilization of a female egg by the male sperm of Adam, and the ensuing
conception, pregnancy, and birth. The identical terminology bespeaks an
identical process, and the only plausible conclusion is that Adam, too, was
brought forth by the Deity through the process of fertilizing a female egg with
the male sperm of a god.
If the "clay" into which the godly element was mixed was an earthly
element—as all texts insist—then the only possible conclusion is that the
male sperm of a god—his genetic material—was inserted into the egg of an
ape-woman!
The Akkadian term for the "clay"—or, rather, "molding clay"—is tit. But
its original spelling was TI.IT ("that which is with life"). In Hebrew, tit
means "mud"; but its synonym is bo , which shares a root with bi a ("marsh")
and be a ("egg").
The story of Creation is replete with plays on words. We have seen the
double and triple meanings of Adam–adama–adamtu–dam. The epithet for
the Mother Goddess, NIN.TI, meant both "lady of life" and "lady of the rib."
Why not, then, bo –bi a–be a ("clay–mud–egg") as a play on words for the
female ovum?
The ovum of a female Homo erectus, fertilized by the genes of a god, was
then implanted within the womb of Ea's spouse; and after the "model" was
obtained, duplicates of it were implanted in the wombs of birth goddesses, to
undergo the process of pregnancy and birth.
The Wise and learned,
Double-seven birth-goddesses had assembled;
Seven brought forth males,
Seven brought forth females.
The Birth Goddess brought forth
The Wind of the Breath of Life.
In pairs were they completed,
In pairs were they completed in her presence.
The creatures were People–
Creatures of the Mother Goddess.
Homo sapiens had been created.
•
The ancient legends and myths, biblical information, and modern science
are also compatible in one more aspect. Like the findings of modern
anthropologists—that Man evolved and emerged in southeast Africa—the
Mesopotamian texts suggest that the creation of Man took place in the Apsu
—in the Lower World where the Land of the Mines was located. Paralleling
Adapa, the "model" of Man, some texts mention "sacred Amama, the Earth
woman," whose abode was in the Apsu.
In the "Creation of Man" text, Enki issues the following instructions to the
Mother Goddess: "Mix to a core the clay from the Basement of Earth, just
above the Abzu." A hymn to the creations of Ea, who "the Apsu fashioned as
his dwelling," begins by stating:
Divine Ea in the Apsu
pinched off a piece of clay,
created Kulla to restore the temples.
The hymn continues to list the construction specialists, as well as those in
charge of the "abundant products of mountain and sea," who were created by
Ea—all, it is inferred, from pieces of "clay" pinched off in the Abzu—the
Land of Mines in the Lower World.
The texts make it abundantly clear that while Ea built a brick house by the
water in Eridu, in the Abzu he built a house adorned with precious stones and
silver. It was there that his creature, Man, originated:
The Lord of the AB.ZU, the king Enki ...
Built his house of silver and lapis-lazuli;
Its silver and lapis-lazuli, like sparkling light,
The Father fashioned fittingly in the AB.ZU.
The Creatures of bright countenance,
Coming forth from the AB.ZU,
Stood all about the Lord Nudimmud.
One can even conclude from the various texts that the creation of Man
caused a rift among the gods. It would appear that at least at first the new
Primitive Workers were confined to the Land of Mines. As a result, the
Anunnaki who were toiling in Sumer proper were denied the benefits of the
new manpower. A puzzling text named by the scholars "The Myth of the
Pickax" is in fact the record of the events whereby the Anunnaki who stayed
in Sumer under Enlil obtained their fair share of the Black-Headed People.
Seeking to reestablish "the normal order," Enlil took the extreme action of
severing the contacts between "Heaven" (the Twelfth Planet or the
spaceships) and Earth, and launched some drastic action against the place
"where flesh sprouted forth."
The Lord,
That which is appropriate he caused to come about.
The Lord Enlil,
Whose decisions are unalterable,
Verily did speed to separate Heaven from Earth
So that the Created Ones could come forth;
Verily did speed to separate Earth from Heaven.
In the "Bond Heaven-Earth" he made a gash,
So that the Created Ones could come up
From the Place-Where-Flesh-Sprouted-Forth.
Against the "Land of Pickax and Basket," Enlil fashioned a marvelous
weapon named AL.A.NI ("ax that produces power"). This weapon had a
"tooth," which, "like a one-horned ox," could attack and destroy large walls.
It was by all descriptions some kind of a huge power drill, mounted on a
bulldozer-like vehicle that crushed everything ahead of it:
The house which rebels against the Lord,
The house which is not submissive to the Lord,
The AL.A.NI makes it submissive to the Lord.
Of the bad ... , the heads of its plants it crushes;
Plucks at the roots, tears at the crown.
Arming his weapon with an "earth splitter," Enlil launched the attack:
The Lord called forth the AL.A.NI, gave its orders.
He set the Earth Splitter as a crown upon its head,
And drove it into the Place-Where-Flesh-Sprouted-Forth.
In the hole was the head of a man;
From the ground, people were breaking through
towards Enlil.
He eyed his Black-headed Ones in steadfast fashion.
Grateful, the Anunnaki put in their requests for the arriving Primitive
Workers and lost no time in putting them to work:
The Anunnaki stepped up to him,
Raised their hands in greetings,
Soothing Enlil's heart with prayers.
Black-headed Ones they were requesting of him.
To the Black-headed people,
they give the pickax to hold.
The Book of Genesis likewise conveys the information that "the Adam"
was created somewhere west of Mesopotamia, then brought over eastward to
Mesopotamia to work in the Garden of Eden:
And the Deity Yahweh
Planted an orchard in Eden, in the east ...
And He took the Adam
And placed him in the Garden of Eden
To work it and to keep it.