
15
•
KINGSHIP ON EARTH
The Deluge, a traumatic experience for Mankind, was no less so for the
"gods"—the Nefilim.
In the words of the Sumerian king lists, "the Deluge had swept over," and
an effort of 120 shar's was wiped away overnight. The south African mines,
the cities in Mesopotamia, the control center at Nippur, the spaceport at
Sippar—all lay buried under water and mud. Hovering in their shuttlecraft
above devastated Earth, the Nefilim impatiently awaited the abatement of the
waters so that they could set foot again on solid ground.
How were they going to survive henceforth on Earth when their cities and
facilities were gone, and even their manpower—Mankind—was totally
destroyed?
When the frightened, exhausted, and hungry groups of Nefilim finally
landed on the peaks of the "Mount of Salvation," they were clearly relieved
to discover that Man and beast alike had not perished completely. Even Enlil,
at first enraged to discover that his aims had been partly frustrated, soon
changed his mind.
The deity's decision was a practical one. Faced with their own dire
conditions, the Nefilim cast aside their inhibitions about Man, rolled up their
sleeves, and lost no time in imparting to Man the arts of growing crops and
cattle. Since survival, no doubt, depended on the speed with which
agriculture and animal domestication could be developed to sustain the
Nefilim and a rapidly multiplying Mankind, the Nefilim applied their
advanced scientific knowledge to the task.
•
Unaware of the information that could be culled from the biblical and
Sumerian texts, many scientists who have studied the origins of agriculture
have arrived at the conclusion that its "discovery" by Mankind some 13,000
years ago was related to the neothermal ("newly warm") climate that
followed the end of the last ice age. Long before modern scholars, however,
the Bible also related the beginnings of agriculture to the aftermath of the
Deluge.
"Sowing and Harvesting" were described in Genesis as divine gifts
granted to Noah and his offspring as part of the post-Diluvial covenant
between the Deity and Mankind:
For as long as the Earth's days shall be,
There shall not cease
Sowing and Harvesting,
Cold and Warmth,
Summer and Winter,
Day and Night.
Having been granted the knowledge of agriculture, "Noah as a
Husbandman was first, and he planted a vineyard": He became the first post-
Diluvial farmer engaged in the deliberate, complicated task of planting.
The Sumerian texts, too, ascribed to the gods the granting to Mankind of
both agriculture and the domestication of animals.
Tracing the beginnings of agriculture, modern scholars have found that it
appeared first in the Near East, but not in the fertile and easily cultivated
plains and valleys. Rather, agriculture began in the mountains skirting the
low-lying plains in a semicircle. Why would farmers avoid the plains and
limit their sowing and reaping to the more difficult mountainous terrain?
The only plausible answer is that the low-lying lands were, at the time
when agriculture began, uninhabitable; 13,000 years ago the low-lying areas
were not yet dry enough following the Deluge. Millennia passed before the
plains and valleys had dried sufficiently to permit the people to come down
from the mountains surrounding Mesopotamia and to settle the low-lying
plains. This, indeed, is what the Book of Genesis tells us: Many generations
after the Deluge, people arriving "from the East"—from the mountainous
areas east of Mesopotamia—"found a plain in the land of Shin'ar [Sumer],
and settled there."
The Sumerian texts state that Enlil first spread cereals "in the hill
country"—in the mountains, not in the plains—and that he made cultivation
possible in the mountains by keeping the floodwaters away. "He barred the
mountains as with a door." The name of this mountainous land east of Sumer,
E.LAM, meant "house where vegetation germinated." Later, two of Enlil's
helpers, the gods Ninazu and Ninmada, extended the cultivation of cereals to
the low-lying plains so that, eventually, "Sumer, the land that knew not grain,
came to know grain."
Scholars, who have now established that agriculture began with the
domestication of wild emmer as a source of wheat and barley, are unable to
explain how the earliest grains (like those found at the Shanidar cave) were
already uniform and highly specialized. Thousands of generations of genetic
selection are needed by nature to acquire even a modest degree of
sophistication. Yet the period, time, or location in which such a gradual and
very prolonged process might have taken place on Earth are nowhere to be
found. There is no explanation for this botanogenetic miracle, unless the
process was not one of natural selection but of artificial manipulation.
Spelt, a hard-grained type of wheat, poses an even greater mystery. It is the
product of "an unusual mixture of botanic genes," neither a development from
one genetic source nor a mutation of one source. It is definitely the result of
mixing the genes of several plants. The whole notion that Man, in a few
thousand years, changed animals through domestication, is also questionable.
Modern scholars have no answers to these puzzles, nor to the general
question of why the mountainous semicircle in the ancient Near East became
a continuous source of new varieties of cereals, plants, trees, fruits,
vegetables, and domesticated animals.
The Sumerians knew the answer. The seeds, they said, were a gift sent to
Earth by Anu from his Celestial Abode. Wheat, barley, and hemp were
lowered to Earth from the Twelfth Planet. Agriculture and the domestication
of animals were gifts given to Mankind by Enlil and Enki, respectively.
Not only the presence of the Nefilim but also the periodic arrivals of the
Twelfth Planet in Earth's vicinity seem to lie behind the three crucial phases
of Man's post-Diluvial civilization: agriculture, circa 11,000 B.C., the
Neolithic culture, circa 7500 B.C., and the sudden civilization of 3800 B.C.
took place at intervals of 3,600 years.
It appears that the Nefilim, passing knowledge to Man in measured doses,
did so in intervals matching the periodic returns of the Twelfth Planet to
Earth's vicinity. It was as though some on-site inspection, some face-to-face
consultation possible only during the "window" period that allowed landings
and takeoffs between Earth and the Twelfth Planet, had to take place among
the "gods" before another "go ahead" could be given.
The "Epic of Etana" provides a glimpse of the deliberations that took
place. In the days that followed the Deluge, it says:
The great Anunnaki who decree the fate
sat exchanging their counsels regarding the land.
They who created the four regions,
who set up the settlements, who oversaw the land,
were too lofty for Mankind.
The Nefilim, we are told, reached the conclusion that they needed an
intermediary between themselves and the masses of humans. They were, they
decided, to be gods—elu in Akkadian, meaning "lofty ones." As a bridge
between themselves as lords and Mankind, they introduced "Kingship" on
Earth: appointing a human ruler who would assure Mankind's service to the
gods and channel the teachings and laws of the gods to the people.
A text dealing with the subject describes the situation before either tiara or
crown had been placed on a human head, or scepter handed down; all these
symbols of Kingship—plus the shepherd's crook, the symbol of righteousness
and justice—"lay deposited before Anu in Heaven." After the gods had
reached their decision, however, "Kingship descended from Heaven" to
Earth.
Both Sumerian and Akkadian texts state that the Nefilim retained the
"lordship" over the lands, and had Mankind first rebuild the pre-Diluvial
cities exactly where they had originally been and as they had been planned:
"Let the bricks of all the cities be laid on the dedicated places, let all the
[bricks] rest on holy places." Eridu, then, was first to be rebuilt.
The Nefilim then helped the people plan and build the first royal city, and
they blessed it. "May the city be the nest, the place where Mankind shall
repose. May the King be a Shepherd."
The first royal city of Man, the Sumerian texts tell us, was Kish. "When
Kingship was lowered again from Heaven, the Kingship was in Kish." The
Sumerian king lists, unfortunately, are mutilated just where the name of the
very first human king was inscribed. We do know, however, that he started a
long line of dynasties whose royal abode changed from Kish to Uruk, Ur,
Awan, Hamazi, Aksak, Akkad, and then to Ashur and Babylon and more
recent capitals.
The biblical "Table of Nations" likewise listed Nimrud—the patriarch of
the kingdoms at Uruk, Akkad, Babylon, and Assyria—as descended from
Kish. It records the spread of Mankind, its lands and Kingships, as an
outgrowth of the division of Mankind into three branches following the
Deluge. Descended from and named after the three sons of Noah, these were
the peoples and lands of Shem, who inhabited Mesopotamia and the Near
Eastern lands; Ham, who inhabited Africa and parts of Arabia; and Japheth,
the Indo-Europeans in Asia Minor, Iran, India, and Europe.
These three broad groupings were undoubtedly three of the "regions"
whose settlement was discussed by the great Anunnaki. Each of the three was
assigned to one of the leading deities. One of these was, of course, Sumer
itself, the region of the Semitic peoples, the place where Man's first great
civilization arose.
The other two also became sites of flourishing civilizations. Circa 3200
B.C.—about half a millennium after the blooming of the Sumerian civilization
—statehood, Kingship, and civilization made their first appearance in the
Nile valley, leading in time to the great civilization of Egypt.
Nothing was known until some fifty years ago about the first major Indo-
European civilization. But by now it is well established that an advanced
civilization, encompassing large cities, a developed agriculture, a flourishing
trade, existed in the Indus valley in ancient times. It came into being, scholars
believe, some 1,000 years after the Sumerian civilization began. (Fig. 161)
Fig. 161
Ancient texts as well as archaeological evidence attest to the close
cultural and economic links between these two river-valley civilizations and
the older Sumerian one. Moreover, both direct and circumstantial evidence
has convinced most scholars that the civilizations of the Nile and Indus not
only were linked to, but were actually offspring of, the earlier civilization of
Mesopotamia.
The most imposing monuments of Egypt, the pyramids, have been found to
be, under a stone "skin," simulations of the Mesopotamian ziggurats; and
there is reason to believe that the ingenious architect who designed the plans
for the great pyramids and supervised their construction was a Sumerian
venerated as a god. (Fig. 162)
The ancient Egyptian name for their land was the "Raised Land," and their
prehistoric memory was that "a very great god who came forth in the earliest
times" found their land lying under water and mud. He undertook great works
of reclamation, literally raising Egypt from under the waters. The "legend"
neatly describes the low-lying valley of the Nile River in the aftermath of the
Deluge; this olden god, it can be shown, was none other than Enki, the chief
engineer of the Nefilim.
Though relatively little is known as yet regarding the Indus valley
civilization, we do know that they, too, venerated the number twelve as the
supreme divine number; that they depicted their gods as human-looking
beings wearing horned headdresses; and that they revered the symbol of the
cross—the sign of the Twelfth Planet. (Figs. 163, 164)
If these two civilizations were of Sumerian origin, why are their written
languages different? The scientific answer is that the languages are not
different. This was recognized as early as 1852, when the Reverend Charles
Foster (The One Primeval Language) ably demonstrated that all the ancient
languages then deciphered, including early Chinese and other Far Eastern
languages, stemmed from one primeval source—thereafter shown to be
Sumerian.
Similar pictographs had not only similar meanings, which could be a
logical coincidence, but also the same multiple meanings and even the same
phonetic sounds—which suggests a common origin. More recently, scholars
have shown that the very first Egyptian inscriptions employed a language that
was indicative of a prior written development; the only place where a
written language had a prior development was Sumer.
So we have a single written language that for some reason was
differentiated into three tongues: Mesopotamian, Egyptian/Hamitic, and Indo-
European. Such a differentiation could have occurred by itself over time,
distance, and geographical separation. Yet the Sumerian texts claim that it
occurred as the result of a deliberate decision of the gods, once again
initiated by Enlil. Sumerian stories on the subject are paralleled by the well-
known biblical story of the Tower of Babel, in which we are told "that the
whole Earth was of one language and of the same words." But after the
people settled in Sumer, learned the art of brickmaking, built cities, and
raised high towers (ziggurats), they planned to make for themselves a shem
and a tower to launch it. Therefore "did the Lord mingle the Earth's tongue."
Fig. 162
Fig. 163
Fig. 164
The deliberate raising of Egypt from under the muddy waters, the linguistic
evidence, and the Sumerian and biblical texts support our conclusion that the
two satellite civilizations did not develop by chance. On the contrary, they
were planned and brought about by the deliberate decision of the Nefilim.
Fearing, evidently, a human race unified in culture and purpose, the
Nefilim adopted the imperial policy: "Divide and rule." For while Mankind
reached cultural levels that included even airborne efforts—after which
"anything they shall scheme to do shall no longer be impossible for them"—
the Nefilim themselves were a declining lot. By the third millennium B.C.,
children and grandchildren, to say nothing of humans of divine parentage,
were crowding the great olden gods.
The bitter rivalry between Enlil and Enki was inherited by their principal
sons, and fierce struggles for supremacy ensued. Even the sons of Enlil—as
we have seen in earlier chapters—fought among themselves, as did the sons
of Enki. As has happened in recorded human history, overlords tried to keep
the peace among their children by dividing the land among the heirs. In at
least one known instance, one son (Ishkur/Adad) was deliberately sent away
by Enlil to be the leading local deity in the Mountain Land.
As time went on, the gods became overlords, each jealously guarding the
territory, industry, or profession over which he had been given dominion.
Human kings were the intermediaries between the gods and the growing and
spreading humanity. The claims of ancient kings that they went to war,
conquered new lands, or subjugated distant peoples "on the command of my
god" should not be taken lightly. Text after text makes it clear that this was
literally so: The gods retained the powers of conducting foreign affairs, for
these affairs involved other gods in other territories. Accordingly, they had
the final say in matters of war or peace.
With the proliferation of people, states, cities, and villages, it became
necessary to find ways to remind the people who their particular overlord, or
"lofty one," was. The Old Testament echoes the problem of having people
adhere to their god and not "prostitute after other gods." The solution was to
establish many places of worship, and to put up in each of them the symbols
and likenesses of the "correct" gods.
The age of paganism began.
•
Following the Deluge, the Sumerian texts inform us, the Nefilim held
lengthy counsels regarding the future of gods and Man on Earth. As a result of
these deliberations, they "created the four regions." Three of them—
Mesopotamia, the Nile valley, and the Indus valley—were settled by Man.
The fourth region was "holy"—a term whose original literal meaning was
"dedicated, restricted." Dedicated to the gods alone, it was a "pure land," an
area that could be approached only with authorization; trespassing could lead
to quick death by "awesome weapons" wielded by fierce guards. This land
or region was named TIL.MUN (literally, "the place of the missiles"). It was
the restricted area where the Nefilim had reestablished their space base after
the one at Sippar had been wiped out by the Deluge.
Once again the area was put under the command of Utu/Shamash, the god
in charge of the fiery rockets. Ancient heroes like Gilgamesh strove to reach
this Land of Living, to be carried by a shem or an Eagle to the Heavenly
Abode of the Gods. We recall the plea of Gilgamesh to Shamash:
Let me enter the Land, let me raise my Shem....
By the life of my goddess mother who bore me,
of the pure faithful king, my father—
my step direct to the Land!
Ancient tales—even recorded history—recall the ceaseless efforts of men
to "reach the land," find the "Plant of Life," gain eternal bliss among the Gods
of Heaven and Earth. This yearning is central to all the religions whose roots
lie deep in Sumer: the hope that justice and righteousness pursued on Earth
will be followed by an "afterlife" in some Heavenly Divine Abode.
But where was this elusive land of the divine connection?
The question can be answered. The clues are there. But beyond it loom
other questions. Have the Nefilim been encountered since? What will happen
when they are encountered again?
And if the Nefilim were the "gods" who "created" Man on Earth, did
evolution alone, on the Twelfth Planet, create the Nefilim?