
6
•
THE TWELFTH PLANET
The suggestion that Earth was visited by intelligent beings from elsewhere
postulates the existence of another celestial body upon which intelligent
beings established a civilization more advanced than ours.
Speculation regarding the possibility of Earth visitation by intelligent
beings from elsewhere has centered, in the past, on such planets as Mars or
Venus as their place of origin. However, now that it is virtually certain that
these two planetary neighbors of Earth have neither intelligent life nor an
advanced civilization upon them, those who believe in such Earth visitations
look to other galaxies and to distant stars as the home of such extraterrestrial
astronauts.
The advantage of such suggestions is that while they cannot be proved,
they cannot be disproved, either. The disadvantage is that these suggested
"homes" are fantastically distant from Earth, requiring years upon years of
travel at the speed of light. The authors of such suggestions therefore
postulate one-way trips to Earth: a team of astronauts on a no-return mission,
or perhaps on a spaceship lost and out of control, crash-landing upon Earth.
This is definitely not the Sumerian notion of the Heavenly Abode of the
Gods.
The Sumerians accepted the existence of such a "Heavenly Abode," a
"pure place," a "primeval abode." While Enlil, Enki, and Ninhursag went to
Earth and made their home upon it, their father Anu remained in the Heavenly
Abode as its ruler. Not only occasional references in various texts but also
detailed "god lists" actually named twenty-one divine couples of the dynasty
that preceded Anu on the throne of the "pure place."
Anu himself reigned over a court of great splendor and extent. As
Gilgamesh reported (and the Book of Ezekiel confirmed), it was a place with
an artificial garden sculpted wholly of semiprecious stones. There Anu
resided with his official consort Antu and six concubines, eighty offspring (of
which fourteen were by Antu), one Prime Minister, three Commanders in
charge of the mus (rocket ships), two Commanders of the Weapons, two
Great Masters of Written Knowledge, one Minister of the Purse, two Chief
Justices, two "who with sound impress," and two Chief Scribes, with five
Assistant Scribes.
Mesopotamian texts refer frequently to the magnificence of the abode of
Anu and the gods and weapons that guarded its gateway. The tale of Adapa
reports that the god Enki, having provided Adapa with a shem,
Made him take the road to Heaven,
and to Heaven he went up.
When he had ascended to Heaven,
he approached the Gate of Anu.
Tammuz and Gizzida were standing guard
at the Gate of Anu.
Guarded by the divine weapons SHAR.UR ("royal hunter") and
SHAR.GAZ ("royal killer"), the throne room of Anu was the place of the
Assembly of the Gods. On such occasions a strict protocol governed the
order of entering and seating:
Enlil enters the throne room of Anu,
seats himself at the place of the right tiara,
on the right of Anu.
Ea enters [the throne room of Anu],
seats himself at the place of the sacred tiara,
on the left of Anu.
The Gods of Heaven and Earth of the ancient Near East not only originated
in the heavens but could also return to the Heavenly Abode. Anu
occasionally came down to Earth on state visits; Ishtar went up to Anu at
least twice. Enlil's center in Nippur was equipped as a "bond heaven-earth."
Shamash was in charge of the Eagles and the launching place of the rocket
ships. Gilgamesh went up to the Place of Eternity and returned to Uruk;
Adapa, too, made the trip and came back to tell about it; so did the biblical
king of Tyre.
A number of Mesopotamian texts deal with the Apkallu, an Akkadian term
stemming from the Sumerian AB.GAL ("great one who leads," or "master
who points the way"). A study by Gustav Guterbock (Die Historische
Tradition und Ihre Literarische Gestaltung bei Babylonier und Hethiten)
ascertained that these were the "bird-men" depicted as the "Eagles" that we
have already shown. The texts that spoke of their feats said of one that he
"brought down Inanna from Heaven, to the E-Anna temple made her
descend." This and other references indicate that these Apkallu were the
pilots of the spaceships of the Nefilim.
Two-way travel was not only possible but actually contemplated to begin
with, for we are told that, having decided to establish in Sumer the Gateway
of the Gods (Babili), the leader of the gods explained:
When to the Primeval Source
for assembly you shall ascend,
There shall be a restplace for the night
to receive you all.
When from the Heavens
for assembly you shall descend,
There shall be a restplace for the night
to receive you all.
Realizing that such two-way travel between Earth and the Heavenly
Abode was both contemplated and practiced, the people of Sumer did not
exile their gods to distant galaxies. The Abode of the Gods, their legacy
discloses, was within our own solar system.
We have seen Shamash in his official uniform as Commander of the
Eagles. On each of his wrists he wears a watchlike object held in place by
metal clasps. Other depictions of the Eagles reveal that all the important ones
wore such objects. Whether they were merely decorative or served a useful
purpose, we do not know. But all scholars are agreed that the objects
represented rosettes—a circular cluster of "petals" radiating from a central
point. (Fig. 86)
The rosette was the most common decorative temple symbol throughout the
ancient lands, prevalent in Mesopotamia, western Asia, Anatolia, Cyprus,
Crete, and Greece. It is the accepted view that the rosette as a temple symbol
was an outgrowth or stylization of a celestial phenomenon—a sun encircled
by its satellites. That the ancient astronauts wore this symbol on their wrists
adds credence to this view.
An Assyrian depiction of the Gateway of Anu in the Heavenly Abode (Fig.
87) confirms ancient familiarity with a celestial system such as our Sun and
its planets. The gateway is flanked by two Eagles—indicating that their
services are needed to reach the Heavenly Abode. The Winged Globe—the
supreme divine emblem—marks the gateway. It is flanked by the celestial
symbols of the number seven and the crescent, representing (we believe) Anu
flanked by Enlil and Enki.
Where are the celestial bodies represented by these symbols? Where is the
Heavenly Abode? The ancient artist answers with yet another depiction, that
of a large celestial deity extending its rays to eleven smaller celestial bodies
encircling it. It is a representation of a Sun, orbited by eleven planets.
That this was not an isolated representation can be shown by reproducing
other depictions on cylinder seals, like this one from the Berlin Museum of
the Ancient Near East. (Fig. 88)
When the central god or celestial body in the Berlin seal is enlarged (Fig.
89), we can see that it depicts a large, ray-emitting star surrounded by eleven
heavenly bodies—planets. These, in turn, rest on a chain of twenty-four
smaller globes. Is it only a coincidence that the number of all the "moons," or
satellites, of the planets in our solar system (astronomers exclude those of ten
miles or less in diameter) is also exactly twenty-four?
Now there is, of course, a catch to claiming that these depictions-of a Sun
and eleven planets—represent our solar system, for our scholars tell us that
the planetary system of which Earth is a part comprises the Sun, Earth and
Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto.
This adds up to the Sun and only ten planets (when the Moon is counted as
one).
But that is not what the Sumerians said. They claimed that our system was
made up of the Sun and eleven planets (counting the Moon), and held
steadfastly to the opinion that, in addition to the planets known to us today,
there has been a twelfth member of the solar system—the home planet of the
Nefilim.
We shall call it the Twelfth Planet.
•
Before we check the accuracy of the Sumerian information, let us review
the history of our own knowledge of Earth and the heavens around it.
We know today that beyond the giant planets Jupiter and Saturn—at
distances insignificant in terms of the universe, but immense in human terms
—two more major planets (Uranus and Neptune) and a third, small one
(Pluto) belong to our solar system. But such knowledge is quite recent.
Uranus was discovered, through the use of improved telescopes, in 1781.
After observing it for some fifty years, some astronomers reached the
conclusion that its orbit revealed the influence of yet another planet. Guided
by such mathematical calculations, the missing planet—named Neptune—
was pinpointed by astronomers in 1846. Then, by the end of the nineteenth
century, it became evident that Neptune itself was being subjected to
unknown gravitational pull. Was there yet another planet in our solar system?
The puzzle was solved in 1930 with the observation and location of Pluto.
Up to 1780, then, and for centuries before that, people believed there were
seven members of our solar system: Sun, Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn. Earth was not counted as a planet because it was believed
that these other celestial bodies circled Earth—the most important celestial
body created by God, with God's most important creation, Man, upon it.
Fig. 86
Fig. 87
Fig. 88
Fig. 89
Our textbooks generally credit Nicolaus Copernicus with the discovery
that Earth is only one of several planets in a heliocentric (Sun-centered)
system. Fearing the wrath of the Christian church for challenging Earth's
central position, Copernicus published his study (De revolutionibus orbium
coelestium) only when on his deathbed, in 1543.
Spurred to reexamine centuries-old astronomical concepts primarily by the
navigational needs of the Age of Discovery, and by the findings by Columbus
(1492), Magellan (1520), and others that Earth was not flat but spherical,
Copernicus depended on mathematical calculations and searched for the
answers in ancient writings. One of the few churchmen who supported
Copernicus, Cardinal Schonberg, wrote to him in 1536: "I have learned that
you know not only the groundwork of the ancient mathematical doctrines, but
that you have created a new theory . . . according to which the Earth is in
motion and it is the Sun which occupies the fundamental and therefore the
cardinal position."
The concepts then held were based on Greek and Roman traditions that
Earth, which was flat, was "vaulted over" by the distant heavens, in which
the stars were fixed. Against the star-studded heavens the planets (from the
Greek word for "wanderer") moved around Earth. There were thus seven
celestial bodies, from which the seven days of the week and their names
originated: the Sun (Sunday), Moon (Monday), Mars (mardi), Mercury
(mercredi), Jupiter (jeudi), Venus (vendredi), Saturn (Saturday). (Fig. 90)
These astronomical notions stemmed from the works and codifications of
Ptolemy, an astronomer in the city of Alexandria, Egypt, in the second century
A.D. His definite findings were that the Sun, Moon, and five planets moved in
circles around Earth. Ptolemaic astronomy predominated for more than 1,300
years—until Copernicus put the Sun in the center.
While some have called Copernicus the "Father of Modern Astronomy,"
others view him more as a researcher and reconstructor of earlier ideas. The
fact is that he pored over the writings of Greek astronomers who preceded
Ptolemy, such as Hipparchus and Aristarchus of Samos. The latter suggested
in the third century B.C. that the motions of the heavenly bodies could better
be explained if the Sun—and not Earth—were assumed to be in the center. In
fact, 2,000 years before Copernicus, Greek astronomers listed the planets in
their correct order from the Sun, acknowledging thereby that the Sun, not
Earth, was the solar system's focal point.
Fig. 90
The heliocentric concept was only rediscovered by Copernicus; and the
interesting fact is that astronomers knew more in 500 B.C. than in A.D. 500 and
1500.
Indeed, scholars are now hard put to explain why first the later Greeks and
then the Romans assumed that Earth was flat, rising above a layer of murky
waters below which there lay Hades or "Hell," when some of the evidence
left by Greek astronomers from earlier times indicates that they knew
otherwise.
Hipparchus, who lived in Asia Minor in the second century B.C., discussed
"the displacement of the sostitial and equinoctial sign," the phenomenon now
called precession of the equinoxes. But the phenomenon can be explained
only in terms of a "spherical astronomy," whereby Earth is surrounded by the
other celestial bodies as a sphere within a spherical universe.
Did Hipparchus, then, know that Earth was a globe, and did he make his
calculations in terms of a spherical astronomy? Equally important is yet
another question. The phenomenon of the precession could be observed by
relating the arrival of spring to the Sun's position (as seen from Earth) in a
given zodiacal constellation. But the shift from one zodiacal house to another
requires 2,160 years. Hipparchus certainly could not have lived long enough
to make that astronomical observation. Where, then, did he obtain his
information?
Eudoxus of Cnidus, another Greek mathematician and astronomer who
lived in Asia Minor two centuries before Hipparchus, designed a celestial
sphere, a copy of which was set up in Rome as a statue of Atlas supporting
the world. The designs on the sphere represent the zodiacal constellations.
But if Eudoxus conceived the heavens as a sphere, where in relation to the
heavens was Earth? Did he think that the celestial globe rested on a fiat Earth
—a most awkward arrangement—or did he know of a spherical Earth,
enveloped by a celestial sphere? (Fig. 91)
Fig. 91
The works of Eudoxus, lost in their originals, have come down to us
thanks to the poems of Aratus, who in the third century B.C. "translated" the
facts put forth by the astronomer into poetic language. In this poem (which
must have been familiar to St. Paul, who quoted from it) the constellations
are described in great detail, "drawn all around"; and their grouping and
naming is ascribed to a very remote prior age. "Some men of yore a
nomenclature thought of and devised, and appropriate forms found."
Who were the "men of yore" to whom Eudoxus attributed the designation
of the constellations? Based on certain clues in the poem, modern
astronomers believe that the Greek verses describe the heavens as they were
observed in Mesopotamia circa 2200 B.C.
The fact that both Hipparchus and Eudoxus lived in Asia Minor raises the
probability that they drew their knowledge from Hittite sources. Perhaps they
even visited the Hittite capital and viewed the divine procession carved on
the rocks there; for among the marching gods two bull-men hold up a globe—
a sight that might well have inspired Eudoxus to sculpt Atlas and the celestial
sphere. (Fig. 92)
Fig. 92
Were the earlier Greek astronomers, living in Asia Minor, better informed
than their successors because they could draw on Mesopotamian sources?
Hipparchus, in fact, confirmed in his writings that his studies were based
on knowledge accumulated and verified over many millennia. He named as
his mentors "Babylonian astronomers of Erech, Borsippa, and Babylon."
Geminus of Rhodes named the "Chaldeans" (the ancient Babylonians) as the
discoverers of the exact motions of the Moon. The historian Diodorus
Siculus, writing in the first century B.C., confirmed the exactness of
Mesopotamian astronomy; he stated that "the Chaldeans named the planets ...
in the center of their system was the Sun, the greatest light, of which the
planets were 'offspring,' reflecting the Sun's position and shine."
The acknowledged source of Greek astronomical knowledge was, then,
Chaldea; invariably, those earlier Chaldeans possessed greater and more
accurate knowledge than the peoples that followed them. For generations,
throughout the ancient world, the name "Chaldean" was synonymous with
"stargazers," astronomers.
Abraham, who came out of "Ur of the Chaldeans," was told by God to gaze
at the stars when the future Hebrew generations were discussed. Indeed, the
Old Testament was replete with astronomical information. Joseph compared
himself and his brothers to twelve celestial bodies, and the patriarch Jacob
blessed his twelve descendants by associating them with the twelve
constellations of the zodiac. The Psalms and the Book of Job refer repeatedly
to celestial phenomena, the zodiacal constellations, and other star groups
(such as the Pleiades). Knowledge of the zodiac, the scientific division of the
heavens, and other astronomical information was thus prevalent in the ancient
Near East well before the days of ancient Greece.
The scope of Mesopotamian astronomy on which the early Greek
astronomers drew must have been vast, for even what archaeologists have
found amounts to an avalanche of texts, inscriptions, seal impressions,
reliefs, drawings, lists of celestial bodies, omens, calendars, tables of rising
and setting times of the Sun and the planets, forecasts of eclipses.
Many such later texts were, to be sure, more astrological than
astronomical in nature. The heavens and the movements of the heavenly
bodies appeared to be a prime preoccupation of mighty kings, temple priests,
and the people of the land in general; the purpose of the stargazing seemed to
be to find in the heavens an answer to the course of affairs on Earth: war,
peace, abundance, famine.
Compiling and analyzing hundreds of texts from the first millennium B.C.,
R. C. Thompson (The Reports of the Magicians and Astrologers of Nineveh
and Babylon) was able to show that these stargazers were concerned with
the fortunes of the land, its people, and its ruler from a national point of
view, and not with individual fortunes (as present-day "horoscopic"
astrology is):
When the Moon in its calculated time is not seen, there will be an
invasion of a mighty city.
When a comet reaches the path of the Sun, field-flow will be
diminished; an uproar will happen twice.
When Jupiter goes with Venus, the prayers of the land will reach the
heart of the gods.
If the Sun stands in the station of the Moon, the king of the land will be
secure on the throne.
Even this astrology required comprehensive and accurate astronomical
knowledge, without which no omens were possible. The Mesopotamians,
possessing such knowledge, distinguished between the "fixed" stars and the
planets that "wandered about" and knew that the Sun and the Moon were
neither fixed stars nor ordinary planets. They were familiar with comets,
meteors, and other celestial phenomena, and could calculate the relationships
between the movements of the Sun, Moon, and Earth, and predict eclipses.
They followed the motions of the celestial bodies and related them to Earth's
orbit and rotation through the heliacal system—the system still in use today,
which measures the rising and setting of stars and planets in Earth's skies
relative to the Sun.
To keep track of the movements of the celestial bodies and their positions
in the heavens relative to Earth and to one another, the Babylonians and
Assyrians kept accurate ephemerides. These were tables that listed and
predicted the future positions of the celestial bodies. Professor George
Sarton (Chaldean Astronomy of the Last Three Centuries B.C.) found that
they were computed by two methods: a later one used in Babylon, and an
older one from Uruk. His unexpected finding was that the older, Uruk method
was more sophisticated and more accurate than the later system. He
accounted for this surprising situation by concluding that the erroneous
astronomical notions of the Greeks and Romans resulted from a shift to a
philosophy that explained the world in geometric terms, while the
astronomer-priests of Chaldea followed the prescribed formulas and
traditions of Sumer.
The unearthing of the Mesopotamian civilizations in the past one hundred
years leaves no doubt that in the field of astronomy, as in so many others, the
roots of our knowledge lie deep in Mesopotamia. In this field, too, we draw
upon and continue the heritage of Sumer.
Sarton's conclusions have been reinforced by very comprehensive studies
by Professor O. Neugebauer (Astronomical Cuneiform Texts), who was
astonished to find that the ephemerides, precise as they were, were not based
on observations by the Babylonian astronomers who prepared them. Instead,
they were calculated "from some fixed arithmetical schemes ... which were
given and were not to be interfered with" by the astronomers who used them.
Such automatic adherence to "arithmetical schemes" was achieved with
the aid of "procedure texts" that accompanied the ephemerides, which "gave
the rules for computing ephemerides step by step" according to some "strict
mathematical theory." Neugebauer concluded that the Babylonian
astronomers were ignorant of the theories on which the ephemerides and
their mathematical calculations were based. He also admitted that "the
empirical and theoretical foundation" of these accurate tables, to a large
extent, escapes modern scholars as well. Yet he is convinced that ancient
astronomical theories "must have existed, because it is impossible to devise
computational schemes of high complication without a very elaborate plan."
Professor Alfred Jeremias (Handbuch der Altorientalischen Geistkultur)
concluded that the Mesopotamian astronomers were acquainted with the
phenomenon of retrograde, the apparent erratic and snakelike course of the
planets as seen from Earth, caused by the fact that Earth orbits the Sun either
faster or slower than the other planets. The significance of such knowledge
lies not only in the fact that retrograde is a phenomenon related to orbits
around the Sun, but also in the fact that very long periods of observation
were required to grasp and track it.
Where were these complicated theories developed, and who made the
observations without which they could not have been developed?
Neugebauer pointed out that "in the procedure texts, we meet a great number
of technical terms of wholly unknown reading, if not unknown meaning."
Someone, much earlier than the Babylonians, possessed astronomical and
mathematical knowledge far superior to that of later culture in Babylon,
Assyria, Egypt, Greece, and Rome.
The Babylonians and Assyrians devoted a substantial part of their
astronomical efforts to keeping an accurate calendar. Like the Jewish
calendar to this very day, it was a solar-lunar calendar, correlating
("intercalating") the solar year of just over 365 days with a lunar month of
just under 30 days. While a calendar was important for business and other
mundane needs, its accuracy was required primarily to determine the precise
day and moment of the New Year, and other festivals and worship of the
gods.
To measure and correlate the intricate movements of Sun, Earth, Moon,
and planets, the Mesopotamian astronomer-priests relied on a complex
spherical astronomy. Earth was taken to be a sphere with an equator and
poles; the heavens, too, were divided by imaginary equatorial and polar
lines. The passage of celestial bodies was related to the ecliptic, the
projection of the plane of Earth's orbit around the Sun upon the celestial
sphere; the equinoxes (the points and the times at which the Sun in its
apparent annual movement north and south crosses the celestial equator); and
the solstices (the time when the Sun during its apparent annual movement
along the ecliptic is at its greatest declination north or south). All these are
astronomical concepts used to this very day.
But the Babylonians and Assyrians did not invent the calendar or the
ingenious methods for its calculation. Their calendars-as well as our own—
originated in Sumer. There the scholars have found a calendar, in use from
the very earliest times, that is the basis for all later calendars. The principal
calendar and model was the calendar of Nippur, the seat and center of Enlil.
Our present-day one is modeled on that Nippurian calendar.
The Sumerians considered the New Year to begin at the exact moment
when the Sun crossed the spring equinox. Professor Stephen Langdon
(Tablets from the Archives of Drehem) found that records left by Dungi, a
ruler of Ur circa 2400 B.C., show that the Nippurian calendar selected a
certain celestial body by whose setting against the sunset it was possible to
determine the exact moment of the New Year's arrival. This, he concluded,
was done "perhaps 2,000 years before the era of Dungi"—that is, circa 4400
B.C.!
Can it really be that the Sumerians, without actual instruments,
nevertheless had the sophisticated astronomical and mathematical know-how
required by a spherical astronomy and geometry? Indeed they had, as their
language shows.
They had a term—DUB—that meant (in astronomy) the 360-degree
"circumference of the world," in relation to which they spoke of the curvature
or arc of the heavens. For their astronomical and mathematical calculations
they drew the AN.UR—an imagined "heavenly horizon" against which they
could measure the rising and setting of celestial bodies. Perpendicular to this
horizon they extended an imagined vertical line, the NU.BU.SAR.DA; with
its aid they obtained the zenith point and called it the AN.PA. They traced the
lines we call meridians, and called them "the graded yokes"; latitude lines
were called "middle lines of heaven." The latitude line marking the summer
solstice, for example, was called AN.BIL ("fiery point of the heavens").
The Akkadian, Hurrian, Hittite, and other literary masterpieces of the
ancient Near East, being translations or versions of Sumerian originals, were
replete with Sumerian loanwords pertaining to celestial bodies and
phenomena. Babylonian and Assyrian scholars who drew up star lists or
wrote down calculations of planetary movements often noted the Sumerian
originals on the tablets that they were copying or translating. The 25,000
texts devoted to astronomy and astrology said to have been included in the
Nineveh library of Ashurbanipal frequently bore acknowledgments of
Sumerian origins.
A major astronomical series that the Babylonians called "The Day of the
Lord" was declared by its scribes to have been copied from a Sumerian
tablet written in the time of Sargon of Akkad—in the third millennium B.C. A
tablet dated to the third dynasty of Ur, also in the third millennium B.C.,
describes and lists a series of celestial bodies so clearly that modern
scholars had little difficulty in recognizing the text as a classification of
constellations, among them Ursa Major, Draco, Lyra, Cygnus and Cepheus,
and Triangulum in the northern skies; Orion, Canis Major, Hydra, Corvus,
and Centaurus in the southern skies; and the familiar zodiacal constellations
in the central celestial band.
In ancient Mesopotamia the secrets of celestial knowledge were guarded,
studied, and transmitted by astronomer-priests. It was thus perhaps fitting that
three scholars who are credited with giving back to us this lost "Chaldean"
science were Jesuit priests: Joseph Epping, Johann Strassman, and Franz X.
Kugler. Kugler, in a masterwork (Sternkunde und Sterndienst in Babel),
analyzed, deciphered, sorted out, and explained a vast number of texts and
lists. In one instance, by mathematically "turning the skies backwards," he
was able to show that a list of thirty-three celestial bodies in the Babylonian
skies of 1800 B.C. was neatly arranged according to present-day groupings!
After much work deciding which are true groups and which are merely
subgroups, the world's astronomical community agreed (in 1925) to divide
the heavens as seen from Earth into three regions—northern, central, and
southern—and group the stars therein into eighty-eight constellations. As it
turned out, there was nothing new in this arrangement, for the Sumerians
were the first to divide the heavens into three bands or "ways"—the northern
"way" was named after Enlil, the southern after Ea, and the central band was
the "Way of Anu"—and to assign to them various constellations. The present-
day central band, the band of the twelve constellations of the zodiac,
corresponds exactly to the Way of Anu, in which the Sumerians grouped the
stars into twelve houses.
In antiquity, as today, the phenomenon was related to the concept of the
zodiac. The great circle of Earth around the Sun was divided into twelve
equal parts, of thirty degrees each. The stars seen in each of these segments,
or "houses," were grouped together into a constellation, each of which was
then named according to the shape the stars of the group seemed to form.
Because the constellation and their subdivisions, and even individual stars
within the constellations, have reached Western civilization with names and
descriptions borrowed heavily from Greek mythology, the Western world
tended for nearly two millennia to credit the Greeks with this achievement.
But it is now apparent that the early Greek astronomers merely adopted into
their language and mythology a ready-made astronomy obtained from the
Sumerians. We have already noted how Hipparchus, Eudoxus, and others
obtained their knowledge. Even Thales, the earliest Greek astronomer of
consequence, who is said to have predicted the total solar eclipse of May 28,
585 B.C., which stopped the war between the Lydians and the Medians,
allowed that the sources of his knowledge were of pre-Semitic
Mesopotamian origins, namely—Sumerian.
We have acquired the name "zodiac" from the Greek zodiakos kyklos
("animal circle") because the layout of the star groups was likened to the
shape of a lion, fishes, and so on. But those imaginary shapes and names
were actually originated by the Sumerians, who called the twelve zodiacal
constellations UL.HE ("shiny herd"):
1. GU.AN.NA ("heavenly bull"), Taurus.
2. MASH.TAB.BA ("twins"), our Gemini.
3. DUB ("pincers," "tongs"), the Crab or Cancer.
4. UR.GULA ("lion"), which we call Leo.
5. AB.SIN ("her father was Sin"), the Maiden, Virgo.
6. ZI.BA.AN.NA ("heavenly fate"), the scales of Libra.
7. GIR.TAB ("which claws and cuts"), Scorpio.
8. PA.BlL ("defender"), the Archer, Sagittarius.
9. SUHUR.MASH ("goat-fish"), Capricorn.
10. GU ("lord of the waters"), the Water Bearer, Aquarius.
11. SIM.MAH ("fishes"), Pisces.
12. KU.MAL ("field dweller"), the Ram, Aries.
The pictorial. representations or signs of the zodiac, like their names, have
remained virtually intact since their introduction in Sumer. (Fig. 93)
Fig. 93
Until the introduction of the telescope, European astronomers accepted the
Ptolemaic recognition of only nineteen constellations in the northern skies.
By 1925, when the current classification was agreed upon, twenty-eight
constellations had been recognized in what the Sumerians called the Way of
Enlil. We should no longer be surprised to find out that, unlike Ptolemy, the
earlier Sumerians recognized, identified, grouped, named, and listed all the
constellations of the northern skies!
Of the celestial bodies in the Way of Enlil, twelve were deemed to be of
Enlil—paralleling the twelve zodiacal celestial bodies in the Way of Anu.
Likewise, in the southern portion of the skies—the Way of Ea—twelve
constellations were listed, not merely as present in the southern skies, but as
of the god Ea. In addition to these twelve principal constellations of Ea,
several others were listed for the southern skies—though not so many as are
recognized today.
The Way of Ea posed serious problems to the Assyriologists who
undertook the immense task of unraveling the ancient astronomical
knowledge not only in terms of modern knowledge but also based on what
the skies should have looked like centuries and millennia ago. Observing the
southern skies from Ur or Babylon, the Mesopotamian astronomers could see
only a little more than halfway into the southern skies; the rest was already
below the horizon. Yet, if correctly identified, some of the constellations of
the Way of Ea lay well beyond the horizon. But there was an even greater
problem: If, as the scholars assumed, the Mesopotamians believed (as the
Greeks did in later times) that Earth was a mass of dry land resting upon the
chaotic darkness of a netherworld (the Greek Hades)—a flat disc over which
the heavens arched in a semicircle—then there should have been no southern
skies at all!
Restricted by the assumption that the Mesopotamians were beholden to a
flat-Earth concept, modern scholars could not permit their conclusions to
take them too much below the equatorial line dividing north and south. The
evidence, however, shows that the three Sumerian "ways" encompassed the
complete skies of a global, not flat, Earth.
1900 T. G. Pinches reported to the Royal Asiatic Society that he was able
to reassemble and reconstruct a complete Mesopotamian astrolabe (literally,
"taker of stars"). He showed it to be a circular disc, divided like a pie into
twelve segments and three concentric rings, resulting in a field of thirty-six
portions. The whole design had the appearance of a rosette of twelve
"leaves," each of which had the name of a month written in it. Pinches
marked them I to XII for convenience, starting. with Nisannu, the first month
of the Mesopotamian calendar. (Fig. 94)
Each of the thirty-six portions also contained a name with a small circle
below it, signifying that it was the name of a celestial body. The names have
since been found in many texts and "star lists" and are undoubtedly the names
of constellations, stars, or planets.
Each of the thirty-six segments also had a number written below the name
of the celestial body. In the innermost ring, the numbers ranged from 30 to 60;
in the central ring, from 60 (written as "I") to 120 (this "2" in the sexagesimal
system meant 2 X 60 = 120); and in the outermost ring, from 120 to 240.
What did these numbers represent?
Writing nearly fifty years after the presentation by Pinches, the astronomer
and Assyriologist O. Neugebauer (A History of Ancient Astronomy:
Problems and Methods) could only say that "the whole text constitutes some
kind of schematic celestial map . . . in each of the thirty-six fields we find the
name of a constellation and simple numbers whose significance is not yet
clear." A leading expert on the subject, B. L. Van der Waerden (Babylonian
Astronomy: The Thirty-Six Stars), reflecting on the apparent rise and fall of
the numbers in some rhythm, could only suggest that "the numbers have
something to do with the duration of daylight."
Fig. 94
The puzzle can be solved, we believe, only if one discards the notion that
the Mesopotamians believed in a flat Earth, and recognizes that their
astronomical knowledge was as good as ours—not because they had better
instruments than we do, but because their source of information was the
Nefilim.
We suggest that the enigmatic numbers represent degrees of the celestial
are, with the North Pole as the starting point, and that the astrolabe was a
planisphere, the representation of a sphere upon a flat surface.
While the numbers increase and decrease, those in the opposite segments
for the Way of Enlil (such as Nisannu—50, Tashritu—40) add up to 90; all
those for the Way of Anu add up to 180; and all those for the Way of Ea add
up to 360 (such as Nisannu 200, Tashritu 160). These figures are too familiar
to be misunderstood; they represent segments of a complete spherical
circumference: a quarter of the way (90 degrees), halfway (180 degrees), or
full circle (360 degrees).
The numbers given for the Way of Enlil are so paired as to show that this
Sumerian segment of the northern skies stretched over 60 degrees from the
North Pole, bordering on the Way of Anu at 30 degrees above the equator.
The Way of Anu was equidistant on both sides of the equator, reaching to 30
degrees south below the equator. Then, farther south and farthest away from
the North Pole, lay the Way of Ea—that part of Earth and of the celestial
globe that lay between 30 degrees south and the South Pole. (Fig. 95)
The numbers in the Way of Ea segments add up to 180 degrees in Addaru
(February–March) and Ululu (August–September). The only point that is 180
degrees away from the North Pole, whether you go south on the east or on the
west, is the South Pole. And this can hold true only if one deals with a
sphere.
Precession is the phenomenon caused by the wobble of Earth's north-south
axis, causing the North Pole (the one pointing at the North Star) and the South
Pole to trace a grand circle in the heavens. The apparent retardation of Earth
against the starry constellations amounts to about fifty seconds of an arc in
one year, or one degree in seventy-two years. The grand circle—the time it
takes the Earth's North Pole to point again at the same North Star—therefore
lasts 25,920 years (72 X 360), and that is what the astronomers call the Great
Year or the Platonian Year (for apparently Plato, too, was aware of the
phenomenon).
The rising and setting of various stars deemed significant in antiquity, and
the precise determination of the spring equinox (which ushered in the New
Year), were related to the zodiacal house in which they occurred. Due to the
precession, the spring equinox and the other celestial phenomena, being
retarded from year to year, were finally retarded once in 2,160 years by a
full zodiacal house. Our astronomers continue to employ a "zero point" ("the
first point of Aries"), which marked the spring equinox circa 900 B.C., but
this point has by now shifted well into the house of Pisces. Circa A.D. 2100
the spring equinox will begin to occur in the preceding house of Aquarius.
This is what is meant by those who say that we are about to enter the Age of
Aquarius. (Fig. 96).
Because the shift from one zodiacal house to another takes more than two
millennia, scholars wondered how and where Hipparchus could have
learned of the precession in the second century B.C. It is now clear that his
source was Sumerian. Professor Langdon's findings reveal that the Nippurian
calendar, established circa 4400 B.C., in the Age of Taurus, reflects
knowledge of the precession and the shift of zodiacal houses that took place
2,160 years earlier than that. Professor Jeremias, who correlated
Mesopotamian astronomical texts with Hittite astronomical texts, was also of
the opinion that older astronomical tablets recorded the change from Taurus
to Aries; and he concluded that the Mesopotamian astronomers predicted and
anticipated the shift from Aries to Pisces.
Fig. 95. THE CELESTIAL SPHERE
A. The Way of Anu, the celestial band of the Sun, planets and the
constellations of the Zodiac
B. The way of Enlil, the northern skies
C. The Way of Ea, the southern skies
Fig. 96
Subscribing to these conclusions, Professor Willy Hartner (The Earliest
History of the Constellations in the Near East) suggested that the Sumerians
left behind plentiful pictorial evidence to that effect. When the spring equinox
was in the zodiac of Taurus, the summer solstice occurred in the zodiac of
Leo. Hartner drew attention to the recurrent motif of a bull–lion "combat"
appearing in Sumerian depictions from earliest times, and suggested that
these motifs represented the key positions of the constellations of Taurus
(Bull) and Leo (Lion) to an observer at 30 degrees north (such as at Ur) circa
4000 B.C. (Fig. 97)
Fig. 97
Most scholars consider the Sumerian stress of Taurus as their first
constellation as evidence not only of the antiquity of the zodiac—dating to
circa 4000 B.C.—but also as testifying to the time when Sumerian civilization
so suddenly began. Professor Jeremias (The Old Testament in the Light of
the Ancient East) found evidence showing that the Sumerian zodiacal-
chronological "point zero" stood precisely between the Bull and the Twins;
from this and other data he concluded that the zodiac was devised in the Age
of Gemini (the Twins)—that is, even before Sumerian civilization began. A
Sumerian tablet in the Berlin Museum (VAT.7847) begins the list of zodiacal
constellations with that of Leo-taking us back to circa 11,000 B.C., when Man
had just begun to till the land.
Professor H. V. Hilprecht (The Babylonian Expedition of the University
of Pennsylvania) went even farther. Studying thousands of tablets bearing
mathematical tabulations, he concluded that "all the multiplication and
division tables from the temple libraries of Nippur and Sippar, and from the
library of Ashurbanipal [in Nineveh] are based upon [the number]
12960000." Analyzing this number and its significance, he concluded that it
could be related only to the phenomenon of the precession, and that the
Sumerians knew of the Great Year of 25,920 years.
This is indeed fantastic astronomical sophistication at an impossible time.
Just as it is evident that the Sumerian astronomers possessed knowledge
that they could not possibly have acquired on their own, so is there evidence
to show that a good deal of their knowledge was of no practical use to them.
This pertains not only to the very sophisticated astronomical methods that
were used—who in ancient Sumer really needed to establish a celestial
equator, for example?—but also to a variety of elaborate texts that dealt with
the measurement of distances between stars.
One of these texts, known as AO.6478, lists the twenty-six major stars
visible along the line we now call the Tropic of Cancer, and gives distances
between them as measured in three different ways. The text first gives the
distances between these stars by a unit called mana shukultu ("measured and
weighed"). It is believed that this was an ingenious device that related the
weight of escaping water to the passage of time. It made possible the
determination of distances between two stars in terms of time.
The second column of distances was in terms of degrees of the arc of the
skies. The full day (daylight and nighttime) was divided into twelve double
hours. The arc of the heavens comprised a full circle of 360 degrees. Hence,
one beru or "double hour" represented 30 degrees of the arc of the heavens.
By this method, passage of time on Earth provided a measure of the distances
in degrees between the named celestial bodies.
The third method of measurement was beru ina shame ("length in the
skies"). F. Thureau-Dangin (Distances entre Etoiles Fixes) pointed out that
while the first two methods were relative to other phenomena, this third
method provided absolute measurements. A "celestial beru," he and others
believe, was equivalent to 10,692 of our present-day meters (11,693 yards).
The "distance in the skies" between the twenty-six stars was calculated in the
text as adding up to 655,200 "beru drawn in the skies."
The availability of three different methods of measuring distances between
stars conveys the great importance attached to the matter. Yet, who among the
men and women of Sumer needed such knowledge—and who among them
could devise the methods and accurately use them? The only possible answer
is: The Nefilim had the knowledge and the need for such accurate
measurements.
Capable of space travel, arriving on Earth from another planet, roaming
Earth's skies—they were the only ones who could, and did, possess at the
dawn of Mankind's civilization the astronomical knowledge that required
millennia to develop, the sophisticated methods and mathematics and
concepts for an advanced astronomy, and the need to teach human scribes to
copy and record meticulously table upon table of distances in the heavens,
order of stars and groups of stars, heliacal risings and settings, a complex
Sun-Moon-Earth calendar, and the rest of the remarkable knowledge of both
Heaven and Earth.
Against this background, can it still be assumed that the Mesopotamian
astronomers, guided by the Nefilim, were not aware of the planets beyond
Saturn—that they did not know of Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto? Was their
knowledge of Earth's own family, the solar system, less complete than that of
distant stars, their order, and their distances?
Astronomical information from ancient times contained in hundreds of
detailed texts lists celestial bodies, neatly arranged by their celestial order
or by the gods or the months or the lands or the constellations with which
they were associated. One such text, analyzed by Ernst F. Weidner
(Handhuch der Bahylonischen Astronomie), has come to be called "The
Great Star List." It listed in five columns tens of celestial bodies as related to
one another, to months, countries, and deities. Another text listed correctly
the main stars in the zodiacal constellations. A text indexed as B.M.86378
arranged (in its unbroken part) seventy-one celestial bodies by their location
in the heavens; and so on and on and on.
In efforts to make sense of this legion of texts, and in particular to identify
correctly the planets of our solar system, a succession of scholars came up
with confusing results. As we now know, their efforts were doomed to
failure because they incorrectly assumed that the Sumerians and their
successors were unaware that the solar system was heliocentric, that Earth
was but another planet, and that there were more planets beyond Saturn.
Ignoring the possibility that some names in the star lists may have applied
to Earth itself, and seeking to apply the great number of other names and
epithets only to the five planets they believed were known to the Sumerians,
scholars reached conflicting conclusions. Some scholars even suggested that
the confusion was not theirs, but a Chaldean mix-up—for some unknown
reason, they said, the Chaldeans had switched around the names of the five
"known" planets.
The Sumerians referred to all celestial bodies (planets, stars, or
constellations) as MUL ("who shine in the heights"). The Akkadian term
kakkab was likewise applied by the Babylonians and Assyrians as a general
term for any celestial body. This practice further frustrated the scholars
seeking to unravel the ancient astronomical texts. But some mul's that were
termed LU.BAD clearly designated planets of our solar system.
Knowing that the Greek name for the planets was "wanderers," the
scholars have read LU.BAD as "wandering sheep," deriving from LU ("those
which are shepherded") and BAD ("high and afar"). But now that we have
shown that the Sumerians were fully aware of the true nature of the solar
system, the other meanings of the term bad ("the olden," "the foundation,"
"the one where death is") assume direct significance.
These are appropriate epithets for the Sun, and it follows that by lubad the
Sumerians meant not mere "wandering sheep" but "sheep" shepherded by the
Sun—the planets of our Sun.
The location and relation of the lubad to each other and to the Sun were
described in many Mesopotamian astronomical texts. There were references
to those planets that are "above" and those that are "below," and Kugler
correctly guessed that the reference point was Earth itself.
But mostly the planets were spoken of in the framework of astronomical
texts dealing with MUL.MUL—a term that kept the scholars guessing. In the
absence of a better solution, most scholars have agreed that the term mulmul
stood for the Pleiades, a cluster of stars in the zodiacal constellation of
Taurus, and the one through which the axis of the spring equinox passed (as
viewed from Babylon) circa 2200 B.C. Mesopotamian texts often indicated
that the mulmul included seven LU.MASH (seven "wanderers that are
familiar"), and the scholars assumed that these were the brightest members of
the Pleiades, which can be seen with the naked eye. The fact that, depending
on classification, the group has either six or nine such bright stars, and not
seven, posed a problem; but it was brushed aside for lack of any better ideas
as to the meaning of mulmul.
Franz Kugler (Sternkunde und Sterndienst in Babel), reluctantly accepted
the Pleiades as the solution, but expressed his astonishment when he found it
stated unambiguously in Mesopotamian texts that mulmul included not only
"wanderers" (planets) but also the Sun and the Moon-making it impossible to
retain the Pleiades idea. He also came upon texts that clearly stated that
"mulmul ul-shu 12" ("mulmul is a band of twelve"), of which ten formed a
distinct group.
We suggest that the term mulmul referred to the solar system, using the
repetitive (MUL.MUL) to indicate the group as a whole, as "the celestial
body comprising all celestial bodies."
Charles Virolleaud (L'Astrologie Chaldéenne), transliterated a
Mesopotamian text (K.3558) that describes the members of the mulmul or
kakkabu/kakkabu group. The text's last line is explicit:
Kakkabu/kakkabll.
The number of its celestial bodies is twelve.
The stations of its celestial bodies twelve.
The complete months of the Moon is twelve.
The texts leave no doubt: The mulmul—our solar system—was made up
of twelve members. Perhaps this should not come as a surprise, for the Greek
scholar Diodorus, explaining the three "ways" of the Chaldeans and the
consequent listing of thirty-six celestial bodies, stated that "of those celestial
gods, twelve hold chief authority; to each of these the Chaldeans assign a
month and a sign of the zodiac."
Ernst Weidner (Der Tierkreis und die Wege am Himmel) reported that in
addition to the Way of Anu and its twelve zodiac constellations, some texts
also referred to the "way of the Sun," which was also made up of twelve
celestial bodies: the Sun, the Moon, and ten others. Line 20 of the so-called
TE-tablet stated: "naphar 12 shere-mesh ha.la. sha kakkab.lu sha Sin u
Shamash ina libbi ittiqu," which means, "all in all, 12 members where the
Moon and Sun belong, where the planets orbit."
We can now grasp the significance of the number twelve in the ancient
world. The Great Circle of Sumerian gods, and of all Olympian gods
thereafter, comprised exactly twelve; younger gods could join this circle only
if older gods retired. Likewise, a vacancy had to be filled to retain the divine
number twelve. The principal celestial circle, the way of the Sun with its
twelve members, set the pattern, according to which each other celestial
band was divided into twelve segments or was allocated twelve principal
celestial bodies. Accordingly, there were twelve months in a year, twelve
double-hours in a day. Each division of Sumer was assigned twelve celestial
bodies as a measure of good luck.
Many studies, such as the one by S. Langdon (Babylonian Menologies and
the Semitie Calendar) show that the division of the year into twelve months
was, from its very beginnings, related to the twelve Great Gods. Fritz
Hommel (Die Astronomie der alten Chaldiier) and others after him have
shown that the twelve months were closely connected with the twelve
zodiacs and that both derived from twelve principal celestial bodies. Charles
F. Jean (Lexicologie sumerienne) reproduced a Sumerian list of twenty-four
celestial bodies that paired twelve zodiacal constellations with twelve
members of our solar system.
In a long text, identified by F. Thureau-Dangin (Rituels accadiens) as a
temple program for the New Year Festival in Babylon, the evidence for the
consecration of twelve as the central celestial phenomenon is persuasive.
The great temple, the Esagila, had twelve gates. The powers of all the
celestial gods were vested in Marduk by reciting twelve times the
pronouncement "My Lord, is He not my Lord." The mercy of the god was
then invoked twelve times, and that of his spouse twelve times. The total of
twenty-four was then matched with the twelve zodiacal constellations and
twelve members of the solar system.
Fig. 98
A boundary stone carved with the symbols of the celestial bodies by a king
of Susa depicts these twenty-four signs: the familiar twelve signs of the
zodiac, and symbols that stand for the twelve members of the solar system.
These were the twelve astral gods of Mesopotamia, as well as of the
Hurrian, Hittite, Greek, and all other ancient pantheons.(Fig.98)
Although our natural counting base is the number ten, the number twelve
permeated all matters celestial and divine long after the Sumerians were
gone. There were twelve Greek Titans, twelve Tribes of Israel, twelve parts
to the magical breastplate of the Israelite High Priest. The power of this
celestial twelve carried over to the twelve Apostles of Jesus, and even in our
decimal system we count from one to twelve, and only after twelve do we
return to "ten and three" (thirteen), "ten and four," and so on.
Where did this powerful, decisive number twelve stem from? From the
heavens.
For the solar system—the mulmul—included, in addition to all the planets
known to us, also the planet of Anu, the one whose symbol—a radiant
celestial body—stood in the Sumerian writing for the god Anu and for
"divine." "The kakkab of the Supreme Scepter is one of the sheep in
mulmul," explained an astronomical text. And when Marduk usurped the
supremacy and replaced Anu as the god associated with this planet, the
Babylonians said: "The planet of Marduk within mulmul appears."
Teaching humanity the true nature of Earth and the heavens, the Nefilim
informed the ancient astronomer-priests not only of the planets beyond Saturn
but also of the existence of the most important planet, the one from which
they came:
THE TWELFTH PLANET.