
7
•
THE EPIC OF CREATION
On most of the ancient cylinder seals that have been found, symbols that
stand for certain celestial bodies, members of our solar system, appear
above the figures of gods or humans.
An Akkadian seal from the third millennium B.C., now at the
Vorderasiatische Abteilung of the State Museum in East Berlin (catalogued
VA/243), departs from the usual manner of depicting the celestial bodies. It
does not show them individually but rather as a group of eleven globes
encircling a large, rayed star. It is clearly a depiction of the solar system as it
was known to the Sumerians: a system consisting of twelve celestial bodies.
(Fig. 99)
We usually show our solar system schematically as a line of planets
stretching away from the Sun in ever-increasing distances. But if we depicted
the planets, not in a line, but one after the other in a circle (the closest,
Mercury, first, then Venus, then Earth, and so on), the result would look
something like Fig. 100. (All drawings are schematic and not to scale;
planetary orbits in the drawings that follow are circular rather than elliptical
for ease of presentation.)
If we now take a second look at an enlargement of the solar system
depicted on cylinder seal VA/243, we shall see that the "dots" encircling the
star are actually globes whose sizes and order conform to that of the solar
system depicted in Fig. 100. The small Mercury is followed by a larger
Venus. Earth, the same size as Venus, is accompanied by the small Moon.
Continuing in a counterclockwise direction, Mars is shown correctly as
smaller than Earth but larger than the Moon or Mercury. (Fig. 101)
The ancient depiction then shows a planet unknown to us—considerably
larger than Earth, yet smaller than Jupiter and Saturn, which clearly follow it.
Farther on, another pair perfectly matches our Uranus and Neptune. Finally,
the smallish Pluto is also there, but not where we now place it (after
Neptune); instead, it appears between Saturn and Uranus.
Treating the Moon as a proper celestial body, the Sumerian depiction fully
accounts for all of our known planets, places them in the correct order (with
the exception of Pluto), and shows them by size.
The 4,500-year-old depiction, however, also insists that there was—or
has been—another major planet between Mars and Jupiter. It is, as we shall
show, the Twelfth Planet, the planet of the Nefilim.
If this Sumerian celestial map had been discovered and studied two
centuries ago, astronomers would have deemed the Sumerians totally
uninformed, foolishly imagining more planets beyond Saturn. Now, however,
we know that Uranus and Neptune and Pluto are really there. Did the
Sumerians imagine the other discrepancies, or were they properly informed
by the Nefilim that the Moon was a member of the solar system in its own
right, Pluto was located near Saturn, and there was a Twelfth Planet between
Mars and Jupiter?
The long-held theory that the Moon was nothing more than "a frozen golf
ball" was not discarded until the successful conclusion of several U.S.
Apollo Moon missions. The best guesses were that the Moon was a chunk of
matter that had separated from Earth when Earth was still molten and plastic.
Were it not for the impact of millions of meteorites, which left craters on the
face of the Moon, it would have been a faceless, lifeless, history-less piece
of matter that solidified and forever follows Earth.
Observations made by unmanned satellites, however, began to bring such
long-held beliefs into question. It was determined that the chemical and
mineral makeup of the Moon was sufficiently different from that of Earth to
challenge the "breakaway" theory. The experiments conducted on the Moon
by the American astronauts and the study and analysis of the soil and rock
samples they brought back have established beyond doubt that the Moon,
though presently barren, was once a "living planet." Like Earth it is layered,
which means that it solidified from its own original molten stage. Like Earth
it generated heat, but whereas Earth's heat comes from its radioactive
materials, "cooked" inside Earth under tremendous pressure, the Moon's heat
comes, apparently, from layers of radioactive materials lying very near the
surface. These materials, however, are too heavy to have floated up. What,
then, deposited them near the Moon's surface?
The Moon's gravity field appears to be erratic, as though huge chunks of
heavy matter (such as iron) had not evenly sunk to its core but were scattered
about. By what process or force, we might ask? There is evidence that the
ancient rocks of the Moon were magnetized. There is also evidence that the
magnetic fields were changed or reversed. Was it by some unknown internal
process, or by an undetermined outside influence?
The Apollo 16 astronauts found on the Moon rocks (called breccias) that
result from the shattering of solid rock and its rewelding together by extreme
and sudden heat. When and how were these rocks shattered, then re-fused?
Other surface materials on the Moon are rich in rare radioactive potassium
and phosphorous, materials that on Earth are deep down inside.
Fig. 99
Fig. 100
Fig. 101
Putting such findings together, scientists are now certain that the Moon and
Earth, formed of roughly the same elements at about the same time, evolved
as separate celestial bodies. In the opinion of the scientists of the U.S.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the Moon evolved
"normally" for its first 500 million years. Then, they said (as reported in The
New York Times),
The most cataclysmic period came 4 billion years ago, when celestial
bodies the size of large cities and small countries came crashing into the
Moon and formed its huge basins and towering mountains.
The huge amounts of radioactive materials left by the collisions
began heating the rock beneath the surface, melting massive amounts of
it and forcing seas of lava through cracks in the surface.
Apollo 15 found a rockslide in the crater Tsiolovsky six times greater
than any rockslide on Earth. Apollo 16 discovered that the collision that
created the Sea of Nectar deposited debris as much as 1,000 miles
away.
Apollo 17 landed near a scarp eight times higher than any on Earth,
meaning it was formed by a moonquake eight times more violent than
any earthquake in history.
The convulsions following that cosmic event continued for some 800
million years, so that the Moon's makeup and surface finally took on their
frozen shape some 3.2 billion years ago.
The Sumerians, then, were right to depict the Moon as a celestial body in
its own right. And, as we shall soon see, they also left us a text that explains
and describes the cosmic catastrophe to which the NASA experts refer.
The planet Pluto has been called "the enigma." While the orbits around the
Sun of the other planets deviate only somewhat from a perfect circle, the
deviation ("eccentricity") of Pluto is such that it has the most extended and
elliptical orbit around the Sun. While the other planets orbit the Sun more or
less within the same plane, Pluto is out of kilter by a whopping seventeen
degrees. Because of these two unusual features of its orbit, Pluto is the only
planet that cuts across the orbit of another planet, Neptune.
In size, Pluto is indeed in the "satellite" class: Its diameter, 3,600 miles, is
not much greater than that of Triton, a satellite of Neptune, or Titan, one of
the ten satellites of Saturn. Because of its unusual characteristics, it has been
suggested that this "misfit" might have started its celestial life as a satellite
that somehow escaped its master and went into orbit around the Sun on its
own.
This, as we shall soon see, is indeed what happened—according to the
Sumerian texts.
And now we reach the climax of our search for answers to primeval
celestial events: the existence of the Twelfth Planet. Astonishing as it may
sound, our astronomers have been looking for evidence that indeed such a
planet once existed between Mars and Jupiter.
Toward the end of the eighteenth century, even before Neptune had been
discovered, several astronomers demonstrated that "the planets were placed
at certain distances from the Sun according to some definite law." The
suggestion, which came to be known as Bode's Law, convinced astronomers
that a planet ought to revolve in a place where hitherto no planet had been
known to exist—that is, between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter.
Spurred by these mathematical calculations, astronomers began to scan the
skies in the indicated zone for the "missing planet." On the first day of the
nineteenth century, the Italian astronomer Giuseppe Piazzi discovered at the
exact indicated distance a very small planet (485 miles across), which he
named Ceres. By 1804 the number of asteroids ("small planets") found there
rose to four; to date, nearly 3,000 asteroids have been counted orbiting the
Sun in what is now called the asteroid belt. Beyond any doubt, this is the
debris of a planet that had shattered to pieces. Russian astronomers have
named it Phayton ("chariot").
While astronomers are certain that such a planet existed, they are unable to
explain its disappearance. Did the planet self-explode? But then its pieces
would have flown off in all directions and not stayed in a single belt. If a
collision shattered the missing planet, where is the celestial body
responsible for the collision? Did it also shorter? But the debris circling the
Sun, when added up, is insufficient to account for even one whole planet, to
say nothing of two. Also, if the asteroids comprise the debris of two planets,
they should have retained the axial revolution of two planets. But all the
asteroids have a single axial rotation, indicating they come from a single
celestial body. How then was the missing planet shattered, and what
shattered it?
The answers to these puzzles have been handed down to us from antiquity.
•
About a century ago the decipherment of the texts found in Mesopotamia
unexpectedly grew into a realization that there—in Mesopotamia—texts
existed that not only paralleled but also preceded portions of the Holy
Scriptures. Die Keilschriften lind das aite Testament by Eberhard Schrader
in 1872 started an avalanche of books, articles, lectures, and debates that
lasted half a century. Was there a link, at some early time, between Babylon
and the Bible? The headlines provocatively affirmed, or denounced: BABEL
UND BIBEL.
Among the texts uncovered by Henry Layard in the ruins of the library of
Ashurbanipal in Nineveh, there was one that told a tale of Creation not unlike
the one in the Book of Genesis. The broken tablets, first pieced together and
published by George Smith in 1876 (The Chaldean Genesis), conclusively
established that there indeed existed an Akkadian text, written in the Old
Babylonian dialect, that related how a certain deity created Heaven and
Earth and all upon Earth, including Man.
A vast literature now exists that compares the Mesopotamian text with the
biblical narrative. The Babylonian deity's work was done, if not in six
"days," then over the span of six tablets. Parallel to the biblical God's
seventh day of rest and enjoyment of his handiwork, the Mesopotamian epic
devotes a seventh tablet to the exaltation of the Babylonian deity and his
achievements. Appropriately, L. W. King named his authoritative text on the
subject The Seven Tablets of Creation.
Now called "The Creation Epic," the text was known in antiquity by its
opening words, Enuma Elish ("When in the heights"). The biblical tale of
Creation begins with the creation of Heaven and Earth; the Mesopotamian
tale is a true cosmogony, dealing with prior events and taking us to the
beginning of time:
Enuma elish fa nabu shamamu
When in the heights Heaven had not been named
Shaplitu ammatum shuma fa zakrat
And below, firm ground [Earth] had not been called
It was then, the epic tells us, that two primeval celestial bodies gave birth
to a series of celestial "gods." As the number of celestial beings increased,
they made great noise and commotion, disturbing the Primeval Father. His
faithful messenger urged him to take strong measures to discipline the young
gods, but they ganged up on him and robbed him of his creative powers. The
Primeval Mother sought to take revenge. The god who led the revolt against
the Primeval Father had a new suggestion: Let his young son be invited to
join the Assembly of the Gods and be given supremacy so that he might go to
fight singlehanded the "monster" their mother turned out to be.
Granted supremacy, the young god—Marduk, according to the Babylonian
version—proceeded to face the monster, and, after a fierce battle,
vanquished her and split her in two. Of one part of her he made Heaven, and
of the other, Earth.
He then proclaimed a fixed order in the heavens, assigning to each
celestial god a permanent position. On Earth he produced the mountains and
seas and rivers, established the seasons and vegetation, and created Man. In
duplication of the Heavenly Abode, Babylon and its towering temple were
built on Earth. Gods and mortals were given assignments, commandments,
and rituals to be followed. The gods then proclaimed Marduk the supreme
deity, and bestowed on him the "fifty names"—the prerogatives and
numerical rank of the Enlilship.
As more tablets and fragments were found and translated, it became
evident that the text was not a simple literary work: It was the most hallowed
historical-religious epic of Babylon, read as part of the New Year rituals.
Intended to propagate the supremacy of Marduk, the Babylonian version
made him the hero of the tale of Creation. This, however, was not always so.
There is enough evidence to show that the Babylonian version of the epic
was a masterful religious-political forgery of earlier Sumerian versions, in
which Anu, Enlil, and Ninurta were the heroes.
No matter, however, what the actors in this celestial and divine drama
were called, the tale is certainly as ancient as Sumerian civilization. Most
scholars see it as a philosophic work—the earliest version of the eternal
struggle between good and evil—or as an allegorical tale of nature's winter
and summer, sunrise and sunset, death and resurrection.
But why not take the epic at face value, as nothing more nor less than the
statement of cosmologic facts as known to the Sumerians, as told them by the
Nefilim? Using such a bold and novel approach, we find that the "Epic of
Creation" perfectly explains the events that probably took place in our solar
system.
The stage on which the celestial drama of Enuma Elish unfolds is the
primeval universe. The celestial actors are the ones who create as well as
the ones being created. Act I:
When in the heights Heaven had not been named,
And below, Earth had not been called;
Naught, but primordial APSU, their Begetter,
MUMMU, and TIAMAT—she who bore them all;
Their waters were mingled together.
No reed had yet formed, no marshland had appeared.
None of the gods had yet been brought into being,
None bore a name, their destinies were undetermined;
Then it was that gods were formed in their midst.
With a few strokes of the reed stylus upon the first clay tablet—in nine
short lines—the ancient poet-chronicler manages to seat us in front row
center, and boldly and dramatically raise the curtain on the most majestic
show ever: the Creation of our solar system.
In the expanse of space, the "gods"—the planets—are yet to appear, to be
named, to have their "destinies"—their orbits—fixed. Only three bodies
exist: "primordial AP.SU" ("one who exists from the beginning"); MUM.MU
("one who was born"); and TIAMAT ("maiden of life"). The "waters" of
Apsu and Tiamat were mingled, and the text makes it clear that it does not
mean the waters in which reeds grow, but rather the primordial waters, the
basic life-giving elements of the universe.
Apsu, then, is the Sun, "one who exists from the beginning."
Nearest him is Mummu. The epic's narrative makes clear later on that
Mummu was the trusted aide and emissary of Apsu: a good description of
Mercury, the small planet rapidly running around his giant master. Indeed,
this was the concept the ancient Greeks and Romans had of the god-planet
Mercury: the fast messenger of the gods.
Farther away was Tiamat. She was the "monster" that Marduk later
shattered—the "missing planet." But in primordial times she was the very
first Virgin Mother of the first Divine Trinity. The space between her and
Apsu was not void; it was filled with the primordial elements of Apsu and
Tiamat. These "waters" "commingled," and a pair of celestial gods-planets-
were formed in the space between Apsu and Tiamat.
Their waters were mingled together....
Gods were formed in their midst:
God LAHMU and god LAHAMU were brought forth;
By name they were called.
Etymologically, the names of these two planets stem from the root LHM
("to make war"). The ancients bequeathed to us the tradition that Mars was
the God of War and Venus the Goddess of both Love and War. LAHMU and
LAHAMU are indeed male and female names, respectively; and the identity
of the two gods of the epic and the planets Mars and Venus is thus affirmed
both etymologically and mythologically. It is also affirmed astronomically:
As the "missing planet," Tiamat was located beyond Mars. Mars and Venus
are indeed located in the space between the Sun (Apsu) and "Tiamat." We
can illustrate this by following the Sumerian celestial map. (Figs. 102, 103)
The process of the formation of the solar system then went on. Lahmu and
Lahamu—Mars and Venus-were brought forth, but even
Before they had grown in age
And in stature to an appointed size—
God ANSHAR and god KISHAR were formed,
Surpassing them [in size].
As lengthened the days and multiplied the years,
God ANU became their son—of his ancestors a rival.
Then Anshar's first-born, Anu,
As his equal and in his image begot NUDIMMUD.
With a terseness matched only by the narrative's precision, Act I of the
epic of Creation has been swiftly played out before our very eyes. We are
informed that Mars and Venus were to grow only to a limited size; but even
before their formation was complete, another pair of planets was formed.
The two were majestic planets, as evidenced by their names—AN.SHAR
("prince, foremost of the heavens") and KI.SHAR ("foremost of the firm
lands"). They overtook in size the first pair, "surpassing them" in stature. The
description, epithets, and location of this second pair easily identify them as
Saturn and Jupiter. (Fig. 104).
Some time then passed ("multiplied the years"), and a third pair of planets
was brought forth. First came ANU, smaller than Anshar and Kishar ("their
son"), but larger than the first planets ("of his ancestors a rival" in size).
Then Anu, in turn, begot a twin planet, "his equal and in his image." The
Babylonian version names the planet NUDIMMUD, an epithet of Ea/Enki.
Once again, the descriptions of the sizes and locations fit the next known pair
of planets in our solar system, Uranus and Neptune.
There was yet another planet to be accounted for among these outer
planets, the one we call Pluto. The "Epic of Creation" has already referred to
Anu as "Anshar's first-born," implying that there was yet another planetary
god "born" to Anshar/Saturn. The epic catches up with this celestial deity
later on, when it relates how Anshar sent out his emissary GAGA on various
missions to the other planets. Gaga appears in function and stature equal to
Apsu's emissary Mummu; this brings to mind the many similarities between
Mercury and Pluto. Gaga, then, was Pluto; but the Sumerians placed Pluto on
their celestial map not beyond Neptune, but next to Saturn, whose "emissary,"
or satellite, it was. (Fig. 105)
As Act I of the "Epic of Creation" came to an end, there was a solar
system made up of the Sun and nine planets:
SUN—Apsu, "one who existed from the beginning."
MERCURY—Mummu, counselor and emissary of Apsu.
VENUS—Lahamu, "lady of battles."
MARS—Lahmu, "deity of war."
??—Tiamat, "maiden who gave life."
JUPITER—Kishar, "foremost of firm lands."
SATURN—Anshar, "foremost of the heavens."
PLUTO—Gaga, counselor and emissary of Anshar.
URANUS—Anu, "he of the heavens."
NEPTUNE—Nudimmud (Ea), "artful creator."
Fig. 102. I. In the Beginning: Sun, Mercury, "Tiamat."
Fig. 103. II. The Inner Planets—the "gods in the midst"—come forth.
Fig. 104. III. The SHAR's—the giant planets—are created, together with their "emissary."
Fig. 105. IV. The last two planets are added—equal, in each other's image.
Where were Earth and the Moon? They were yet to be created, products of
the forthcoming cosmic collision.
With the end of the majestic drama of the birth of the planets, the authors of
the Creation epic now raise the curtain on Act II, on a drama of celestial
turmoil. The newly created family of planets was far from being stable. The
planets were gravitating toward each other; they were converging on Tiamat,
disturbing and endangering the primordial bodies.
The divine brothers banded together;
They disturbed Tiamat as they surged back and forth.
They were troubling the "belly" of Tiamat
By their antics in the dwellings of heaven.
Apsu could not lessen their clamor;
Tiamat was speechless at their ways.
Their doings were loathsome. . ..
Troublesome were their ways.
We have here obvious references to erratic orbits. The new planets
"surged back and forth"; they got too close to each other ("banded together");
they interfered with Tiamat's orbit; they got too close to her "belly"; their
"ways" were troublesome. Though it was Tiamat that was principally
endangered, Apsu, too, found the planets' ways "loathsome." He announced
his intention to "destroy, wreck their ways." He huddled with Mummu,
conferred with him in secret. But "whatever they had plotted between them"
was overheard by the gods, and the plot to destroy them left them speechless.
The only one who did not lose his wits was Ea. He devised a ploy to "pour
sleep upon Apsu." When the other celestial gods liked the plan, Ea "drew a
faithful map of the universe" and cast a divine spell upon the primeval waters
of the solar system.
What was this "spell" or force exerted by "Ea" (the planet Neptune)—then
the outermost planet—as it orbited the Sun and circled all the other planets?
Did its own orbit around the Sun affect the Sun's magnetism and thus its
radioactive outpourings? Or did Neptune itself emit, upon its creation, some
vast radiations of energy? Whatever the effects were, the epic likened them
to a "pouring of sleep"—a calming effect—upon Apsu (the Sun). Even
"Mummu, the Counsellor, was powerless to stir."
As in the biblical tale of Samson and Delilah, the hero—overcome by
sleep—could easily be robbed of his powers. Ea moved quickly to rob Apsu
of his creative role. Quenching, it seems, the immense outpourings of
primeval matter from the Sun, Ea/Neptune "pulled off Apsu's tiara, removed
his cloak of aura." Apsu was "vanquished." Mummu could no longer roam
about. He was "bound and left behind," a lifeless planet by his master's side.
By depriving the Sun of its creativity—stopping the process of emitting
more energy and matter to form additional planets—the gods brought
temporary peace to the solar system. The victory was further signified by
changing the meaning and location of the Apsu. This epithet was henceforth
to be applied to the "Abode of Ea." Any additional planets could henceforth
come only from the new Apsu—from "the Deep"—the far reaches of space
that the outermost planet faced.
How long was it before the celestial peace was broken once more? The
epic does not say. But it does continue, with little pause, and raises the
curtain on Act III:
In the Chamber of Fates, the place of Destinies,
A god was engendered, most able and wisest of gods;
In the heart of the Deep was MARDUK created.
A new celestial "god"—a new planet-now joins the cast. He was formed
in the Deep, far out in space, in a zone where orbital motion—a planet's
"destiny"—had been imparted to him. He was attracted to the solar system by
the outermost planet: "He who begot him was Ea" (Neptune). The new planet
was a sight to behold:
Alluring was his figure, sparkling the lift of his eyes;
Lordly was his gait, commanding as of olden times....
Greatly exalted was he above the gods, exceeding throughout....
He was the loftiest of the gods, surpassing was his height;
His members were enormous, he was exceedingly tall.
Appearing from outer space, Marduk was still a newborn planet, belching
fire and emitting radiation. "When he moved his lips, fire blazed forth."
As Marduk neared the other planets, "they heaped upon him their awesome
flashes," and he shone brightly, "clothed with the halo of ten gods." His
approach thus stirred up electrical and other emissions from the other
members of the solar system. And a single word here confirms our
decipherment of the Creation epic: Ten celestial bodies awaited him—the
Sun and only nine other planets.
The epic's narrative now takes us along Marduk's speeding course. He
first passes by the planet that "begot" him, that pulled him into the solar
system, the planet Ea/Neptune. As Marduk nears Neptune, the latter's
gravitational pull on the newcomer grows in intensity. It rounds out Marduk's
path, "making it good for its purpose."
Marduk must still have been in a very plastic stage at that time. As he
passed by Ea/Neptune, the gravitational pull caused the side of Marduk to
bulge, as though he had "a second head." No part of Marduk, however, was
torn off at this passage; but as Marduk reached the vicinity of Anu/Uranus,
chunks of matter began to tear away from him, resulting in the formation of
four satellites of Marduk. "Anu brought forth and fashioned the four sides,
consigned their power to the leader of the host." Called "winds," the four
were thrust into a fast orbit around Marduk, "swirling as a whirlwind."
The order of passage—first by Neptune, then by Uranus—indicates that
Marduk was coming into the solar system not in the system's orbital direction
(counterclockwise) but from the opposite direction, moving clockwise.
Moving on, the oncoming planet was soon seized by the immense
gravitational and magnetic forces of the giant Anshar/Saturn, then
Kishar/Jupiter. His path was bent even more inward—into the center of the
solar system, toward Tiamat. (Fig. 106)
The approach of Marduk soon began to disturb Tiamat and the inner
planets (Mars, Venus, Mercury). "He produced streams, disturbed Tiamat; the
gods were not at rest, carried as in a storm."
Though the lines of the ancient text were partially damaged here, we can
still read that the nearing planet "diluted their vitals ... pinched their eyes."
Tiamat herself "paced about distraught"—her orbit, evidently, disturbed.
The gravitational pull of the large approaching planet soon began to tear
away parts of Tiamat. From her midst there emerged eleven "monsters," a
"growling, raging" throng of satellites who "separated themselves" from her
body and "marched at the side of Tiamat." Preparing herself to face the
onrushing Marduk, Tiamat "crowned them with halos," giving them the
appearance of "gods" (planets).
Of particular importance to the epic and to Mesopotamian cosmogony was
Tiamat's chief satellite, who was named KINGU, "the first-born among the
gods who formed her assembly."
She exalted Kingu,
In their midst she made him great....
The high command of the battle
She entrusted into his hand.
Fig. 106
Subjected to conflicting gravitational pulls, this large satellite of Tiamat
began to shift toward Marduk. It was this granting to Kingu of a Tablet of
Destinies—a planetary path of his own—that especially upset the outer
planets. Who had granted Tiamat the right to bring forth new planets? Ea
asked. He took the problem to Anshar, the giant Saturn.
All that Tiamat had plotted, to him he repeated:
"... she has set up an Assembly and is furious with rage.
she has added matchless weapons, has borne monster-gods.
withal eleven of this kind she has brought forth;
from among the gods who formed her Assembly,
she has elevated Kingu, her first-born, made him chief ...
she has given him a Tablet of Destinies, fastened it
on his breast."
Turning to Ea, Anshar asked him whether he could go to slay Kingu. The
reply is lost due to a break in the tablets; but apparently Ea did not satisfy
Anshar, for the continuing narrative has Anshar turning to Anu (Uranus) to
find out whether he would "go and stand up to Tiamat." But Anu "was unable
to face her and turned back."
In the agitated heavens, a confrontation builds; one god after another steps
aside. Will no one do battle with the raging Tiamat?
Marduk, having passed Neptune and Uranus, is now nearing Anshar
(Saturn) and his extended rings. This gives Anshar an idea: "He who is
potent shall be our Avenger; he who is keen in battle: Marduk, the Hero!"
Coming within reach of Saturn's rings ("he kissed the lips of Anshar"),
Marduk answers:
"If I, indeed, as your Avenger
Am to vanquish Tiamat, save your lives–
Convene an Assembly to proclaim my Destiny supreme!"
The condition was audacious but simple: Marduk and his "destiny"—his
orbit around the Sun—were to be supreme among all the celestial gods. It
was then that Gaga, Anshar/Saturn's satellite—and the future Pluto—was
loosened from his course:
Anshar opened his mouth,
To Gaga, his Counsellor, a word he addressed....
"Be on thy way, Gaga,
take the stand before the gods,
and that which I shall tell thee
repeat thou unto them."
Passing by the other god/planets, Gaga urged them to "fix your decrees for
Marduk." The decision was as anticipated: The gods were only too eager to
have someone else go to settle the score for them. "Marduk is king!" they
shouted, and urged him to lose no more time: "Go and cut off the life of
Tiamat!"
The curtain now rises on Act IV, the celestial battle.
The gods have decreed Marduk's "destiny"; their combined gravitational
pull has now determined Marduk's orbital path so that he can go but one way
—toward a "battle," a collision with Tiamat.
As befits a warrior, Marduk armed himself with a variety of weapons. He
filled his body with a "blazing flame"; "he constructed a bow ... attached
thereto an arrow ... in front of him he set the lightning"; and "he then made a
net to enfold Tiamat therein." These are common names for what could only
have been celestial phenomena—the discharge of electrical bolts as the two
planets converged, the gravitational pull (a "net") of one upon the other.
But Marduk's chief weapons were his satellites, the four "winds" with
which Uranus had provided him when Marduk passed by that planet: South
Wind, North Wind, East Wind, West Wind. Passing now by the giants, Saturn
and Jupiter, and subjected to their tremendous gravitational pull, Marduk
"brought forth" three more satellites—Evil Wind, Whirlwind, and Matchless
Wind.
Using his satellites as a "storm chariot," he "sent forth the winds that he
had brought forth, the seven of them." The adversaries were ready for battle.
The Lord went forth, followed his course;
Towards the raging Tiamat he set his face....
The Lord approached to scan the innerside of Tiamat–
The scheme of Kingu, her consort, to perceive.
But as the planets drew nearer each other, Marduk's course became
erratic:
As he looks on, his course becomes upset,
His direction is distracted, his doings are confused.
Even Marduk's satellites began to veer off course:
When the gods, his helpers,
Who were marching at his side,
Saw the valiant Kingu, blurred became their vision.
Were the combatants to miss each other after all?
But the die was cast, the courses irrevocably set on collision. "Tiamat
emitted a roar" ... "the Lord raised the flooding storm, his mighty weapon."
As Marduk came ever closer, Tiamat's "fury" grew; "the roots of her legs
shook back and forth." She commenced to cast "spells" against Marduk—the
same kind of celestial waves Ea had earlier used against Apsu and Mummu.
But Marduk kept coming at her.
Tiamat and Marduk, the wisest of the gods,
Advanced against one another;
They pressed on to single combat,
They approached for battle.
The epic now turns to the description of the celestial battle, in the
aftermath of which Heaven and Earth were created.
The Lord spread out his net to enfold her;
The Evil Wind, the rearmost, he unleashed at her face.
As she opened her mouth, Tiamat, to devour him—
He drove in the Evil Wind so that she close not her lips.
The fierce storm Winds then charged her belly;
Her body became distended; her mouth had opened wide.
He shot there through an arrow, it tore her belly;
It cut through her insides, tore into her womb.
Having thus subdued her, her life-breath he extinguished.
Here, then, (Fig. 107) is a most original theory explaining the celestial
puzzles still confronting us. An unstable solar system, made up of the Sun and
nine planets, was invaded by a large, comet-like planet from outer space. It
first encountered Neptune; as it passed by Uranus, the giant Saturn, and
Jupiter, its course was profoundly bent inward toward the solar system's
center, and it brought forth seven satellites. It was unalterably set on a
collision course with Tiamat, the next planet in line.
But the two planets did not collide, a fact of cardinal astronomical
importance: It was the satellites of Marduk that smashed into Tiamat, and not
Marduk himself. They "distended" Tiamat's body, made in her a wide
cleavage. Through these fissures in Tiamat, Marduk shot an "arrow," a
"divine lightning," an immense bolt of electricity that jumped as a spark from
the energy-charged Marduk, the planet that was "filled with brilliance."
Finding its way into Tiamat's innards, it "extinguished her life-breath"—
neutralized Tiamat's own electric and magnetic forces and fields, and
"extinguished" them.
The first encounter between Marduk and Tiamat left her fissured and
lifeless; but her final fate was still to be determined by future encounters
between the two. Kingu, leader of Tiamat's satellites, was also to be dealt
with separately. But the fate of the other ten, smaller satellites of Tiamat was
determined at once.
After he had slain Tiamat, the leader,
Her band was shortered, her host broken up.
The gods, her helpers who marched at her side,
Trembling with fear,
Turned their backs about so as to save and preserve their lives.
Can we identify this "shortered ... broken" host that trembled and "turned
their backs about"—reversed their direction?
By doing so we offer an explanation to yet another puzzle of our solar
system—the phenomenon of the comets. Tiny globes of matter, they are often
referred to as the solar system's "rebellious members," for they appear to
obey none of the normal rules of the road. The orbits of the planets around
the Sun are (with the exception of Pluto) almost circular; the orbits of the
comets are elongated, and in most instances very much so—to the extent that
some of them disappear from our view for hundreds or thousands of years.
The planets (with the exception of Pluto) orbit the Sun in the same general
plane; the comets' orbits lie in many diverse planes. Most significant, while
all the planets known to us circle the Sun in the same counterclockwise
direction, many comets move in the reverse direction.
Fig. 107. THE CELESTIAL BATTLE
A. Marduk's "winds" colliding with Tiamat and her "host" (led by Kingu).
Astronomers are unable to say what force, what event created the comets
and threw them into their unusual orbits. Our answer: Marduk. Sweeping in
the reverse direction, in an orbital plane of his own, he shortered, broke the
host of Tiamat into smaller comets and affected them by his gravitational
pull, his so-called net:
Thrown into the net, they found themselves ensnared....
The whole band of demons that had marched on her side
He cast into fetters, their hands he bound....
Tightly encircled, they could not escape.
After the battle was over, Marduk took away from Kingu the Tablet of
Destinies (Kingu's independent orbit) and attached it to his own (Marduk's)
breast: his course was bent into permanent solar orbit. From that time on,
Marduk was bound always to return to the scene of the celestial battle.
Having "vanquished" Tiamat, Marduk sailed on in the heavens, out into
space, around the Sun, and back to retrace his passage by the outer planets:
Ea/Neptune, "whose desire Marduk achieved," Anshar/Saturn, "whose
triumph Marduk established." Then his new orbital path returned Marduk to
the scene of his triumph, "to strengthen his hold on the vanquished gods,"
Tiamat and Kingu.
As the curtain is about to rise on Act V, it will be here—and only here,
though this has not hitherto been realized—that the biblical tale of Genesis
joins the Mesopotamian "Epic of Creation"; for it is only at this point that the
tale of the Creation of Earth and Heaven really began.
Completing his first-ever orbit around the Sun, Marduk "then returned to
Tiamat, whom he had subdued."
The Lord paused to view her lifeless body.
To divide the monster he then artfully planned.
Then, as a mussel, he split her into two parts.
Marduk himself now hit the defeated planet, splitting Tiamat in two,
severing her "skull," or upper part. Then another of Marduk's satellites, the
one called North Wind, crashed into the separated half. The heavy blow
carried this part—destined to become Earth—to an orbit where no planet had
been orbiting before:
The Lord trod upon Tiamat's hinder part;
With his weapon the connected skull he cut loose;
He severed the channels of her blood;
And caused the North Wind to bear it
To places that have been unknown.
Earth had been created!
The lower part had another fate: on the second orbit, Marduk himself hit it,
smashing it to pieces (Fig. 108):
The [other] half of her he set up as a screen for the skies:
Locking them together, as watchmen he stationed them....
He bent Tiamat's tail to form the Great Band as a bracelet.
The pieces of this broken half were hammered to become a "bracelet" in
the heavens, acting as a screen between the inner planets and the outer
planets. They were stretched out into a "great band." The asteroid belt had
been created.
Fig. 108. THE CELESTIAL BATTLE
B. Tiamat has been split: its shattered half is the Heaven—the Asteroid Belt;
the other half, Earth, is thrust to a new orbit by Marduk's satellite "North
Wind." Tiamat's chief satellite, Kingu, becomes Earth's Moon; her other
satellites now make up the comets.
Astronomers and physicists recognize the existence of great differences
between the inner, or "terrestrial," planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth and its
Moon, and Mars) and the outer planets (Jupiter and beyond), two groups
separated by the asteroid belt. We now find, in the Sumerian epic, ancient
recognition of these phenomena.
Moreover, we are offered—for the first time—a coherent cosmogonic-
scientific explanation of the celestial events that led to the disappearance of
the "missing planet" and the resultant creation of the asteroid belt (plus the
comets) and of Earth. After several of his satellites and his electric bolts
split Tiamat in two, another satellite of Marduk shunted her upper half to a
new orbit as our planet Earth; then Marduk, on his second orbit, smashed the
lower half to pieces and stretched them in a great celestial band.
Every puzzle that we have mentioned is answered by the "Epic of
Creation" as we have deciphered it. Moreover, we also have the answer to
the question of why Earth's continents are concentrated on one side of it and a
deep cavity (the Pacific Ocean's bed) exists on the opposite side. The
constant reference to the "waters" of Tiamat is also illuminating. She was
called the Watery Monster, and it stands to reason that Earth, as part of
Tiamat, was equally endowed with these waters. Indeed, some modern
scholars describe Earth as "Planet Ocean"—for it is the only one of the solar
system's known planets that is blessed with such life-giving waters.
New as these cosmologic theories may sound, they were accepted fact to
the prophets and sages whose words fill the Old Testament. The prophet
Isaiah recalled "the primeval days" when the might of the Lord "carved the
Haughty One, made spin the watery monster, dried up the waters of Tehom-
Raba." Calling the Lord Yahweh "my primeval king," the Psalmist rendered
in a few verses the cosmogony of the epic of Creation. "By thy might, the
waters thou didst disperse; the leader of the watery monsters thou didst break
up." Job recalled how this celestial Lord also smote "the assistants of the
Haughty One"; and with impressive astronomical sophistication exalted the
Lord who:
The hammered canopy stretched out in the place of Tehom,
The Earth suspended in the void....
His powers the waters did arrest,
His energy the Haughty One did cleave;
His Wind the Hammered Bracelet measured out;
His hand the twisting dragon did extinguish.
Biblical scholars now recognize that the Hebrew Tehom ("watery deep")
stems from Tiamat; that Tehom-Raba means "great Tiamat," and that the
biblical understanding of primeval events is based upon the Sumerian
cosmologic epics. It should also be clear that first and foremost among these
parallels are the opening verses of the Book of Genesis, describing how the
Wind of the Lord hovered over the waters of Tehom, and how the lightning of
the Lord (Marduk in the Babylonian version) lit the darkness of space as it
hit and split Tiamat, creating Earth and the Rakia (literally, "the hammered
bracelet"). This celestial band (hitherto translated as "firmament") is called
"the Heaven."
The Book of Genesis (1:8) explicitly states that it is this "hammered out
bracelet" that the Lord had named "heaven" (shamaim). The Akkadian texts
also called this celestial zone "the hammered bracelet" (rakkis), and
describe how Marduk stretched out Tiamat's lower part until he brought it
end to end, fastened into a permanent great circle. The Sumerian sources
leave no doubt that the specific "heaven," as distinct from the general concept
of heavens and space, was the asteroid belt.
Our Earth and the asteroid belt are the "Heaven and Earth" of both
Mesopotamian and biblical references, created when Tiamat was
dismembered by the celestial Lord.
After Marduk's North Wind had pushed Earth to its new celestial location,
Earth obtained its own orbit around the Sun (resulting in our seasons) and
received its axial spin (giving us day and night). The Mesopotamian texts
claim that one of Marduk's tasks after he created Earth was, indeed, to have
"allotted [to Earth] the days of the Sun and established the precincts of day
and night." The biblical concepts are identical:
And God said:
"Let there be Lights in the hammered Heaven,
to divide between the Day and the Night;
and let them be celestial signs
and for Seasons and for Days and for Years."
Modern scholars believe that after Earth became a planet it was a hot ball
of belching volcanoes, filling the skies with mists and clouds. As
temperatures began to cool, the vapors turned to water, separating the face of
Earth into dry land and oceans.
The fifth tablet of Enuma Elish, though badly mutilated, imparts exactly
the same scientific information. Describing the gushing lava as Tiamat's
"spittle," the Creation epic correctly places this phenomenon before the
formation of the atmosphere, the oceans of Earth, and the continents. After the
"cloud waters were gathered," the oceans began to form, and the
"foundations" of Earth—its continents—were raised. As "the making of
cold"—a cooling off—took place, rain and mist appeared. Meanwhile, the
"spittle" continued to pour forth, "laying in layers," shaping Earth's
topography.
Once again, the biblical parallel is clear:
And God said:
"Let the waters under the skies be gathered together,
unto one place, and let dry land appear."
And it was so.
Earth, with oceans, continents, and an atmosphere, was now ready for the
formation of mountains, rivers, springs, valleys. Attributing all Creation to
the Lord Marduk, Enuma Elish continued the narration:
Putting Tiamat's head [Earth] into position,
He raised the mountains thereon.
He opened springs, the torrents to draw off.
Through her eyes he released the Tigris and Euphrates.
From her teats he formed the lofty mountains,
Drilled springs for wells, the water to carry off.
In perfect accord with modern findings, both the Book of Genesis and
Enuma Elish and other related Mesopotamian texts place the beginning of
life upon Earth in the waters, followed by the "living creatures that swarm"
and "fowl that fly." Not until then did "living creatures after their kind: cattle
and creeping things and beasts" appear upon Earth, culminating with the
appearance of Man—the final act of Creation.
•
As part of the new celestial order upon Earth, Marduk "made the divine
Moon appear ... designated him to mark the night, define the days every
month."
Who was this celestial god? The text calls him SHESH.KI ("celestial god
who protects Earth"). There is no mention earlier in the epic of a planet by
this name; yet there he is, "within her heavenly pressure [gravitational
field]." And who is meant by "her": Tiamat or Earth?
The roles of, and references to, Tiamat and Earth appear to be
interchangeable. Earth is Tiamat reincarnated. The Moon is called Earth's
"protector"; that is exactly what Tiamat called Kingu, her chief satellite.
The Creation epic specifically excludes Kingu from the "host" of Tiamat
that were shortered and scattered and put into reverse motion around the Sun
as comets. After Marduk completed his own first orbit and returned to the
scene of the battle, he decreed Kingu's separate fate:
And Kingu, who had become chief among them,
He made shrink;
As god DUG.GA.E he counted him.
He took from him the Tablet of Destinies,
Not rightfully his.
Marduk, then, did not destroy Kingu. He punished him by taking away his
independent orbit, which Tiamat had granted him as he grew in size. Shrunk
to a smaller size, Kingu remained a "god"—a planetary member of our solar
system. Without an orbit he could only become a satellite again. As Tiamat's
upper part was thrown into a new orbit (as the new planet Earth), we
suggest, Kingu was pulled along. Our Moon, we suggest, is Kingu, Tiamat's
former satellite.
Transformed into a celestial duggae, Kingu had been stripped of his
"vital" elements—atmosphere, waters, radioactive matter; he shrank in size
and became "a mass of lifeless clay." These Sumerian terms fittingly
describe our lifeless Moon, its recently discovered history, and the fate that
befell this satellite that started out as KIN.GU ("great emissary") and ended
up as DUG.GA.E ("pot of lead").
L. W. King (The Seven Tablets of Creation) reported the existence of three
fragments of an astronomical-mythological tablet that presented another
version of Marduk's battle with Tiamat, which included verses that dealt with
the manner in which Marduk dispatched Kingu. "Kingu, her spouse, with a
weapon not of war he cut away ... the Tablets of Destiny from Kingu he took
in his hand." A further attempt, by B. Landesberger (in 1923, in the Archiv
fur Keilschriftforschung), to edit and fully translate the text, demonstrated
the interchangeability of the names Kingu/Ensu/Moon.
Such texts not only confirm our conclusion that Tiamat's main satellite
became our Moon; they also explain NASA's findings regarding a huge
collision "when celestial bodies the size of large cities came crashing into
the Moon." Both the NASA findings and the text discovered by L. W. King
describe the Moon as the "planet that was laid waste."
Cylinder seals have been found that depict the celestial battle, showing
Marduk fighting a fierce female deity. One such depiction shows Marduk
shooting his lightning at Tiamat, with Kingu, clearly identified as the Moon,
trying to protect Tiamat, his creator. (Fig. 109)
This pictorial evidence that Earth's Moon and Kingu were the same
satellite is further enhanced by the etymological fact that the name of the god
SIN, in later times associated with the Moon, derived from SU.EN ("lord of
wasteland").
Having disposed of Tiamat and Kingu, Marduk once again "crossed the
heavens and surveyed the regions." This time his attention was focused on
"the dwelling of Nudimmud" (Neptune), to fix a final "destiny" for Gaga, the
erstwhile satellite of Anshar/Saturn who was made an "emissary" to the other
planets.
The epic informs us that as one of his final acts in the heavens, Marduk
assigned this celestial god "to a hidden place," a hitherto unknown orbit
facing "the deep" (outer space), and entrusted to him the "counsellorship of
the Watery Deep." In line with his new position, the planet was renamed
US.MI ("one who shows the way"), the outermost planet, our Pluto.
Fig. 109
According to the Creation epic, Marduk had at one point boasted, "The
ways of the celestial gods I will artfully alter ... into two groups shall they be
divided."
Indeed he did. He eliminated from the heavens the Sun's first partner-in-
Creation, Tiamat. He brought Earth into being, thrusting it into a new orbit
nearer the Sun. He hammered a "bracelet" in the heavens-the asteroid belt
that does separate the group of inner planets from the group of outer planets.
He turned most of Tiamat's satellites into comets; her chief satellite, Kingu,
he put into orbit around Earth to become the Moon. And he shifted a satellite
of Saturn, Gaga, to become the planet Pluto, imparting to it some of Marduk's
own orbital characteristics (such as a different orbital plane).
The puzzles of our solar system—the oceanic cavities upon Earth, the
devastation upon the Moon, the reverse orbits of the comets, the enigmatic
phenomena of Pluto—all are perfectly answered by the Mesopotamian
Creation epic, as deciphered by us.
Having thus "constructed the stations" for the planets, Marduk took for
himself "Station Nibiru," and "crossed the heavens and surveyed" the new
solar system. It was now made up of twelve celestial bodies, with twelve
Great Gods as their counterparts. (Fig. 110)
Fig. 110