
Prologue: GENESIS
•
At a time when our own astronauts have landed on the Moon and our
unmanned spacecraft explore other planets, it is no longer impossible to
believe that a civilization on another planet more advanced than ours was
capable of landing its astronauts on the planet Earth at some time in the past.
Indeed, a number of popular writers have speculated that ancient artifacts
such as the pyramids and giant stone sculptures must have been fashioned by
advanced visitors from another planet.

There is, however, little novelty in such intriguing speculation. Even the
ancient peoples themselves believed that superior beings "from the
heavens"—the ancient gods—came down to Earth. What no popular writer
on the subject provides is answers. If, indeed, such beings did come to Earth,
when did they come, how did they come, from where did they come, and
what did they do here during their stay?

What we propose to do is to provide answers to these questions. Using the
Old Testament as our anchor, and submitting as evidence nothing but the
texts, drawings, and artifacts left us by the ancient peoples of the Near East,
we will go beyond the intriguing questions and the provocative suggestions.
We will prove that Earth was indeed visited in its past by astronauts from
another planet.

We will identify the planet from which these astronauts came.

We will decipher a sophisticated ancient cosmology that explains better
than our present sciences how Earth and other parts of the solar system came
into being.

We will lay bare ancient reports of a celestial collision, as a result of
which an intruding planet was captured into the Sun's orbit, and show that all
the ancient religions were based on the knowledge and veneration of this
twelfth member of our solar system.

We will prove that this Twelfth Planet was the home planet of the ancient
visitors to Earth. We will submit texts and celestial maps dealing with the
space flights to Earth, and will establish when and why they came to Earth.

We will describe them, and show how they looked and dressed and ate,
glimpse their craft and weapons, follow their activities upon Earth, their
loves and jealousies, achievements and struggles. We will unravel the secret
of their "immortality."

We will trace the dramatic events that led to the "Creation" of Man, and
show the advanced methods by which this was accomplished. We will then
follow the tangled relationship of Man and his deities, and throw light on the
true meaning of the events passed to us in the tales of the Garden of Eden, the
Tower of Babel, the Deluge, the rise of civilization, the three branches of
Mankind. We will show how Man—endowed by his makers biologically and
materially—ended up crowding his gods off Earth.

We will show that Man is not alone and that future generations will have
yet another encounter with the bearers of the Kingship of Heaven.