Book 5 [originally Book 4 ]
On Winds
(1.1) Wind is flowing air. Some people have defined it as follows: wind
is air flowing in one direction. This definition looks more thorough,
because air is never so motionless as to be free from all turbulence.
Thus the sea is called calm not <when it is ruffled by no turbulence
at all, but> when it is moving only slightly, and is not tending in one
direction. So if you read, “when the sea stood still and calm in the
wind,”1 be aware that it is not standing still but rippling gently, and
it is called calm because it is not heading in this direction or that.
(2) One must take the same view about air too, that it is never mo-
tionless even if it is still. You may infer this from the following ob-
servation: when sunlight pours into an enclosed space, we see tiny
particles moving in different directions, some up, some down, and
colliding chaotically. (3) So anyone who says “A wave is a motion of
the sea” will not be conveying his meaning carefully enough, because
calm sea is also in motion; but he will have thoroughly covered him-
self if his definition is “A wave is a motion of the sea in one direction.”
In just the same way, on the subject we are investigating at the mo-
ment, no one will be outwitted if he makes a point of saying, “Wind
is air flowing in one direction,” or “air flowing with an impact,” or “a
mass of air moving in one direction,” or “air rushing somewhere very
swiftly.” (4) I know the response that could be made in favor of the
original definition: “Why need you add air flowing ‘in one direction’?
For anything flowing is automatically flowing in one direction. No
one says that water is flowing if its movement is just internal, but if
it is traveling somewhere. So something can move and not flow, and
conversely it cannot flow except in one direction.” (5) Well, if this
brief version is sufficiently protected against captious objections, let
us use it, but if someone is more cautious, he should not hold back
from adding a phrase that can prevent any quibbling. Now let us
move on to the real business, since we have argued enough about
the form of words.2
(2) Democritus says that when there are many particles, which
he calls atoms, in a confined empty space, the result is a wind;3 on
73book five
74
the other hand, the air is in a peaceful, still state when there are few
particles in a large empty space. “In a marketplace or street, so long
as there are few people, one can walk without interference, but when
a crowd converges in a confined area, there is quarrelling as people
bump into each other. In exactly the same way, in the space surround-
ing us, when many particles have filled a small region, inevitably they
bump into each other, push forward and get pushed back, become
entwined and get forced together. This generates wind, when the
particles that were wrestling with each other move off and, after long
turmoil and hesitation, choose one direction. But when there are
few particles moving in a large empty space, they cannot be jostled
or pushed.”
(3.1) That this is false you may infer merely from the fact that wind
occurs least of all when the air is dense with cloud. Yet then many
particles have converged in a confined space, and this produces the
dense mass of thick clouds. (2) Add that near rivers and lakes there is
often a mist, as particles are packed and massed together, yet there
is no wind. Sometimes such darkness envelops us that we lose sight
of people standing close to us, which would not happen unless many
particles forced their way into a small space. Yet no conditions are
freer of wind than mist. (3) Add that, on the contrary, what hap-
pens is that the sun when it rises rarefies the thick, moist morning
air; breezes spring up when the particles are given room and their
congestion and crowding is dispersed.
(4.1) “So how do winds occur,” you ask, “since you reject that ex-
planation?” In more than one way: sometimes the earth itself emits
a large quantity of air and breathes out from deep within; sometimes
when strong, continuous evaporation from its surface has driven the
emissions upward, the struggles of these heterogeneous exhalations
turn to wind. (2) The following idea is one I cannot be persuaded
either to believe or to suppress: in our bodies food produces flatu-
lence, which causes considerable offence to our noses as it is emitted,
sometimes relieving the bowels noisily, sometimes more discreetly;
they think that, in just the same way, this immense natural system
emits breath as it processes its nourishment. It is just as well for us
that it always has good digestion; otherwise we should have some-
thing rather disgusting to be afraid of. (3) Is it perhaps truer to say
that many particles are constantly being given off from every part of75
on winds
the earth? When they have been packed together and then begin to
be thinned out by the sunshine, since everything that expands in a
narrow space wants more room, a wind springs up.
(5.1) But wait a minute: do I think that this is the only cause of
wind, evaporation from water and land? Does this produce denseness
in the air, which is then loosened by <the sun’s> impact, when what
had been tightly packed inevitably struggles to find a broader space as
it expands? I certainly think this is one explanation of wind, but the
following is a much more powerful and truer one: air has a natural
ability to move; it does not acquire it from any external source, but
has an innate capacity for movement, among other things. (2) Do you
think that we have been given strength to move ourselves, but the
air has been left inert and immobile, even though water possesses its
own motion even when the winds are still? Otherwise it would not
produce living creatures; and we also see moss growing in water and
grasslike plants floating on the surface. Therefore water has some
vital power. (6) Am I talking just about water? Fire, which consumes
everything, creates certain things, and—this seems incredible, but it
is true—living creatures are generated by fire.4 So air possesses some
vital power, and consequently at one moment it makes itself dense;
at another it expands and purifies itself; sometimes it contracts; <at
other times> it spreads out and expands.
So the difference between air and wind is the same as that be-
tween a lake and a river.5 Sometimes the sun itself is the cause of
wind, spreading out cold air and expanding it from a dense, compact
state.
(7.1) We have spoken about winds generally; now let us begin
to discuss them individually. Perhaps it will be clear how they are
formed if it is clear when and from where they come. So first let us
examine the predawn breezes that come either from rivers, or from
valleys, or from some depression. (2) None of these is persistent, but
they die down when the sun gets stronger, and do not travel out of
sight of land. This kind of wind begins in spring, does not last beyond
summer, and comes especially from places with a lot of water and
mountains. Flat regions, even if they have plenty of water, do not
have breezes—I mean those that count as winds.
(8.1) So how is the kind of air current that the Greeks call encol-
pias produced? 6 The emissions given off by marshes and rivers (theybook five
76
are both abundant and continuous) by day nourish the sun,7 but at
night they are not used up, and when enclosed by mountains, they
collect in one spot. When they have filled it and no longer have
enough room, they are forced to go somewhere, and they advance in
one direction: this is a wind. So it follows the invitation of a more
accessible exit and an empty space that the accumulated material can
rush into. (2) There is proof of this in the fact that the wind does not
blow during the first part of the night. Then the concentration is only
beginning to form, but by daybreak it is already full and congested,
and is looking for somewhere it can flow to; and it particularly makes
for where there is a lot of empty space and a large, open area. It is
spurred on by the sunrise striking the cold air; for even before the
sun is visible, its light is strong, and though it is not yet propelling
the air with its rays, still it is already arousing and provoking it with
the light it sends on ahead. (3) Once the sun itself has emerged, some
material is drawn upward, some is scattered by the heat. So these
winds are not allowed to flow beyond the dawn period; all their force
is extinguished by the sight of the sun. Even if they have been blow-
ing more violently, they still slacken around midday, and the breeze
never lasts right up till noon. Some of these breezes are weaker and
briefer <than others>, according to the strength or weakness of the
material whose accumulation generates them.
(9.1) Why are such winds stronger in spring and summer? (They
blow very lightly in the rest of the year, too weakly to fill sails.) Be-
cause spring is wet, and there is more evaporation from rainwater and
from places that are water-logged and flooded because of the damp
state of the atmosphere. (2) But why do they blow just as strongly
in summer? Because the heat of the day continues after sunset, and
lasts for most of the night: this draws out the emerging exhalations
and extracts more vigorously what is usually given off spontaneously;
but then it does not have enough strength to consume what it has
drawn out. Therefore there is a longer period during which land and
water are emitting the particles that are regularly emanating and
being exhaled. (3) Sunrise produces wind not just with its heat but
also with its impact. For, as I have said,8 the light that precedes the
sun does not yet heat the air but only strikes it; and when struck it
moves sideways. However, I would not actually agree that the light
itself has no heat, since it is derived from heat. (4) Perhaps it does77
on winds
not have enough heat for us to feel it, but it does its job and expands
and rarefies dense things. Besides, places that through some unfair-
ness on nature’s part are so enclosed that they can get no sunlight are
nevertheless warmed by their cloudy, gloomy light and are less chilly
during the day than at night. (5) Also, all heat naturally drives away
and repels mists; therefore the sun too does the same, and so, some
people think, the air current comes from the direction of the sun.
(10.1) That this is false is clear from the fact that a breeze can blow
in any direction, and ships can go toward the sunrise under full sail;
which could not happen if wind always came from the sun.
The etesian winds,9 too, which some people invoke as evidence,
do not help their thesis much. (2) I shall first say what these people
think, then why I disagree. “There are no etesian winds in winter,”
they say, “because during the very short days the sunlight comes to an
end before the cold is overcome; so snow both settles and lasts. They
begin to blow in summer when the days last longer and also the sun’s
rays fall on us vertically. (3) So it is likely that the snows, when hit by
this great heat, exhale more moisture, and also that the earth, once
unburdened of the snow and exposed, breathes more freely. Thus
more particles come from the northern region of the sky and travel
down to the regions that are lower and warmer; that is how the ete-
sians acquire their force. (4) For that reason, they start at the solstice
and do not last beyond the rise of the Dog Star,10 because by then a
lot of material from the cold region of the sky has been discharged
into this region, and the sun, reversing its direction, moves to the
south, where it is more directly overhead, and draws one part of the
air toward itself, but drives the other part forward.11 So the blowing
of the etesians breaks the force of the summer and protects against
the oppressiveness of the hottest months.”
(11.1) Now, as I promised, I must say why the etesians do not help
us and do not contribute to the explanation of this kind of breeze. We
have said that the breeze is spurred on before daylight,12 and then dies
down when the sun touches it. Yet the etesians are called sleepy and
self-indulgent by sailors, because, in Gallio’s words,13 “they can’t get
up in the morning”; they start to emerge roughly at the time when
even the longer-lasting breezes have stopped. This would not happen
if the sun set them in motion as it does the breeze. (2) Add that if the
reason for their blowing were the length and duration of the day, theybook five
78
would blow before the solstice as well, when the days are very long
and when the snows are melting most rapidly. For by July everything
is laid bare, or certainly very little is still lying under snow.
(12.1) There are some kinds of wind that are emitted by clouds
that burst and disintegrate in a downward direction: the Greeks call
these winds eknephiai.14 They are produced as follows, in my view.
There is great inequality and dissimilarity among the particles that
are emitted by the heat of the earth and rise high in the sky: some
of these particles are dry, some moist. There is a great commotion as
the particles fight each other when they are gathered into a single
mass, and as a result it is likely that some hollow clouds are formed,
and that gaps are left between them, tubular and narrow like a reed-
pipe. (2) Rarefied breath is trapped in these gaps, and, having no
clear path, when it is buffeted, it grows hot and looks for a larger
space. This makes it expand; it tears apart whatever envelops it, and
it bursts out as a wind. This is generally squally, because it is propelled
downward from above, and falls on us powerfully and sharply; for
it is not spread out and does not have a clear passage, but struggles
and makes a path for itself in a violent battle. It is usually a short
gust, because it bursts through the enclosures in the clouds through
which it was moving, and through the clouds’ defenses. So its arrival
is stormy and sometimes accompanied by fire and noise from the
sky.15 (3) These winds are much more powerful and longer lasting
if they also gather up other air currents that have been produced in
the same way and are racing along, and if many of them unite in a
single flow; just as torrents are of modest size as long as they each
have their own separate channel, but when they have absorbed the
waters of many others, they exceed the size of regular, perennial riv-
ers. (4) It is plausible that the same happens with squalls too: that
they are short-lived as long as they are on their own; but when they
have joined forces, and breath ejected from many regions of the sky
has all headed in the same direction, there is an increase in both
their power and their duration. (5) So a disintegrating cloud produces
wind, and it can disintegrate in many ways: sometimes a concentra-
tion of breath bursts it, sometimes the wrestling of breath trapped
inside and struggling to escape, sometimes heat, produced on occa-
sion by the sun, on occasion by the jostling and mutual friction of
particles moving erratically.79
on winds
(13.1) At this point, if you agree, we can ask how a whirlwind is
produced. In the case of rivers it commonly happens that so long
as they move unimpeded, their course is simple and straight; but
when they run into some rock or a projecting section of the river
bank, they are violently deflected, and whirl their waters round in
circles without any way out; the result is that they are swallowed up
in themselves as they rotate and form a vortex. (2) In the same way
wind, so long as there are no obstacles, gives its energy free rein; but
when it is deflected by some prominence, or is forced into a sloping,
narrow channel <in a slender gap> between converging land-masses,
it wheels round on itself repeatedly, and produces a vortex similar
to the whirling water we have described. (3) This wind that revolves
and circles on the same spot and whips itself up as it spins is a whirl-
wind. If it is more aggressive and spins for longer, it catches fire and
produces what the Greeks call a prester : that is, a fiery whirlwind.
Virtually all the perils that tear away rigging and lift entire ships up
in the air are the result of winds that burst out of clouds.
(4) Also, some winds generate further winds and drive and scatter
the air in directions different from the one they themselves have been
taking. I shall say something else that occurs to me too: drips of wa-
ter, even though they are already poised and threatening to fall, have
not actually fallen yet; but when several of them converge and gain
strength from their numbers, then they are said to flow and move;
in just the same way, as long as there are only slight movements of
disturbed air in various places, there is not yet a wind; the wind starts
when it has blended them all together and merged their momentum
into one. A breath differs from a wind in degree: for a more powerful
breath is a wind, and conversely a breath is air flowing gently.
(14.1) I shall now repeat what I said at the start,16 that winds are
emitted from caves and recesses within the earth. The earth does
not consist entirely of a solid structure reaching right down to its
foundations, but in many parts it is hollow and “suspended above
dark hiding-places.” 17 <In some places it has abundant water,> in
others it has empty spaces without any liquid. (2) Although down
there no light reveals differences in the air, I shall nevertheless state
that in the darkness there are clouds and mists. For even in the case
of those above the earth, they do not exist because they are seen, but
they are seen because they exist: below ground too, they do not existbook five
80
any the less because they are not seen. You may be sure that down
there rivers as big as our own are flowing, some of them moving
gently, others crashing noisily over rocky rapids. And tell me, will
you not equally grant that there are some lakes beneath the earth
as well and some stagnant waters without an outlet? (3) If this is so,
it is also inevitable that the air becomes heavy, and, when heavy, it
pushes forward and stirs up a wind with its pressure. We shall also
be sure that air currents generated by those subterranean clouds are
nurtured in the darkness until they have enough strength either to
sweep away the resistance of the earth, or to seize some passageway
that is available for these emissions of air and to emerge through that
cavern into where we live. (4) It is obvious that beneath the earth
there is a great quantity of sulphur and of other substances that feed
fire just as well. When the breath that is seeking a way out hurtles
through these areas, it must ignite a fire with the friction; then as
the flames spread out wider, even if some of this air was sluggish, it
must expand and move and look for a channel with enormous noise
and energy. But I shall develop this topic in more detail when I am
investigating earthquakes.18
(15.1) Now let me tell a story. Asclepiodotus19 writes that a num-
ber of men were sent by Philip down an old mine that had long
since been abandoned;20 they were to explore how rich its deposits
were, what state it was in, whether past greed had left anything for
future generations. They descended with plenty of lights, enough to
last many days; then, when exhausted by the long journey, they saw
enormous rivers and huge lakes of stagnant water, like our own, not
cramped by the earth weighing down on them, but with plenty of
open space—and they could not help shuddering at the sight. (2) I
read this with great pleasure. For I realized that our generation is
struggling with vices that are not new but inherited from long ago;
in our day it was not the first time that greed had rummaged in the
veins of earth and rock and searched in the darkness for what was
inadequately concealed. Those ancestors of ours whom we are con-
stantly praising, whom we complain that we so little resemble, were
led on by their hopes to hack into mountains, and stood on top of
their gain, beneath their ruin.21 (3) Before King Philip of Macedon
there were people who would pursue money into the very deepest re-
cesses, and, though endowed with upright,22 free spirits, would stoopThe east wind has retreated to the dawn and the kingdom of
the Nabataeans
and Persia and the mountains beneath dawn’s rays.
The evening and the shores that are warmed by the setting sun
are closest to the west winds. Scythia and the Plough25
are occupied by the chilling north wind; the opposite region
is drenched by constant cloud and the rainy south wind.26
(2) Or if you would rather list them more briefly, let them gather in
a single storm (something that is quite impossible):
both east and south wind rush together, and the African wind,
laden with storms,27
and the north wind, which had no part in that quarrel.
(3) Some people think there are twelve winds. They divide each
of the four sections of the sky into three, and give each wind two
subordinates. Varro,28 a careful scholar, arranges them in this fash-
ion, and not without good reason. The sun does not always rise or
set in the same place,29 but the rising and setting at the equinoxes
81
on winds
to enter those caves where no contrast between night and day ever
penetrated. What great hope made them leave the daylight behind?
Human beings stand erect, facing the stars, so what great neces-
sity made them bend down, buried them, and plunged them to the
depths of the earth’s interior, to dig out gold that is no less danger-
ous to search for than to possess? (4) For its sake they dug tunnels
and crawled after their grubby, undependable plunder, forgetting the
daylight, forgetting the better world on which they had turned their
backs. Does the earth lie as heavy on any corpse as it did on those
people,23 over whom great greed threw the weight of the earth, whom
it robbed of the sky, whom it buried in the depths where that foul
poison lurks? 24 They were bold enough to descend to where they en-
countered a new natural order: earth suspended above them, winds
blowing aimlessly in the darkness, grim springs of water flowing for
no one’s benefit, and deep, endless night. Then when they have done
that, they are afraid of the underworld!
(16.1) But to return to the subject under discussion, there are four
winds, distributed in the east, west, south, and north. The rest, which
we call by various names, are associated with these.book five
82
(of which there are two), at the summer solstice, and at the winter
solstice, are all different. (4) The wind that blows from the equinoctial
rising point is called subsolanus by us,30 and the Greek name for it
is apheliotes. Eurus comes from the winter solstitial rising, and our
fellow countrymen have named it uolturnus. Titus Livius31 calls it
by this name in that battle that did not go well for the Romans, in
which our army was drawn up facing both the rising sun and the
wind, and Hannibal defeated us with the help of the wind and of
the brightness that dazzled his enemies’ eyes. Varro employs this
name as well, but now eurus too has been granted citizenship, and
is no foreigner when it crops up in our language. The wind coming
from the summer solstitial rising the Greeks call kaikias, but we
have no name for it. (5) The equinoctial setting sends us favonius,
which even people who know no Greek will tell you is zephyrus.
Corus comes from the summer solstitial setting; some people call it
argestes. I disagree, because corus is violent, and sweeps things along
in one direction, but argestes is normally gentle and equally useful to
people sailing in either direction. From the winter solstitial setting,
the African wind, which rages and rushes, is called lips by the Greeks.
(6) On the north side the most important place goes to aquilo,32 the
middle one to septemtrio, the lowest to Thraikias:33 we have no name
for this one. In the south there is euronotos; then notos, auster in Latin;
then leukonotos, for which we have no name.
(17.1) It is thought that there are twelve winds not because there
are that many everywhere (for some are shut out by the earth’s con-
tours), but because nowhere are there more. Thus we talk of six cases34
not because every noun has six, but because none has more than six.
(2) Those who have said there are twelve winds have taken the view
that the number of winds corresponds to the number of the sectors of
the sky. The sky is divided into five circles that pass through the key
divisions of the world: there is the arctic circle, the tropic of Cancer,
the equatorial circle, the tropic of Capricorn, and the antarctic circle.
In addition there is a sixth that divides the upper part of the world
from the lower; for as you know, half of the world is always above us,
half below. (3) This line between the visible and the hidden [that is
this circle] the Greeks call the horizon, our countrymen have called it
the delimiter, or others the delimiting circle.35 One must also add the
meridian circle, which intersects the horizon at right angles. Some of83
on winds
these circles run at an angle and intersect the others as they encoun-
ter them. There must be partitions in the air corresponding to each
of these sections. (4) Thus the horizon or delimiting circle intersects
those five circles I have just described and creates ten sections, five
in the east, five in the west. The meridian circle, which meets the
horizon, adds two regions. Thus the air has twelve partitions and
produces as many winds.
(5) Certain winds are unique to certain places and do not travel
far but blow locally. They do not rush in from the edge of the whole
world: atabulus plagues Apulia, iapyx Calabria, sciron Athens, crageus
Pamphylia, and circius Gaul. When this last one destroys buildings,
the local population nevertheless give thanks, on the grounds that
they owe the healthiness of their climate to it. The deified Augustus
certainly vowed and built a temple to it when he spent time in Gaul.
It would be never-ending if I wanted to go through these winds in-
dividually: for there is virtually no region without some breeze that
springs up in it and dies down close by.
(18.1) Among the other works of providence, this also may be
regarded as worthy of admiration: providence did not devise winds
or distribute them in different locations for one reason alone, but,
first, so that they would not allow the air to grow stagnant, but by
constant agitation would make it beneficial and life-giving to those
who would be breathing it; (2) next, so that they might supply the
land with rain and at the same time prevent an excess of it. For one
moment they bring clouds, the next they drive them away, so that
rain can be shared out across the entire earth. The south wind drives
them to Italy, the north wind forces them back to Africa. The etesians
do not allow clouds to settle in our region; they also water all of India
and Ethiopia with continuous rain during that period. (3) And just
think: grain could not be harvested if the redundant material mixed
in with what needs to be kept were not winnowed out by an air cur-
rent, if there were not something to make the crops grow and to burst
open their wrappings (farmers call them husks) and reveal the grain
hidden inside! (4) Just think how wind has given all nations commu-
nications with each other and brought together peoples separated by
geography! An enormous kindness of nature’s, if the folly of humans
did not pervert it to their own harm! As things are, what was com-
monly said about Gaius Marius, and was recorded by Titus Livius,36book five
84
that it is uncertain whether it was more in the state’s interests for
him to be born or not to be born, can also be said about winds. For
their useful and essential effects cannot match what the madness of
the human race devises to its own ruination. (5) But those benefits
do not cease to be intrinsically good just because they cause harm
through the fault of those who misuse them. It was not for this that
providence and the god who manages the world gave the winds the
task of keeping the air moving and poured out winds from all direc-
tions to prevent anything becoming desolate through neglect—it
was not so that we could cram armed soldiers into fleets that would
take control of a large part of the sea, nor so that we could search for
an enemy on the sea or beyond the sea.37 (6) What madness drives
us on and sets us against each other to our mutual destruction? We
spread sails to the winds to look for war; we court danger for the sake
of danger; we risk the fickleness of fortune, powerful storms that no
human resources can overcome, and death with no hope of burial.
(7) It would not be worth the cost if after all this we arrived at peace:
as it is, when we have got past all the hidden reefs and the traps set
by shallow seas, when we have escaped towering, stormy mountains
from which wind hurtles down and smashes into seafarers, when
we have escaped daylight shrouded in cloud and nights wild with
downpours and thunder, when we have escaped ships torn apart by
whirlwinds, what profit will we get from this effort and fear, what
port will welcome us when we are exhausted by all these sufferings?
War, of course; an enemy waiting for us on the shore; races destined
to be slaughtered and to bring down most of their conquerors with
them; and ancient cities in flames! (8) Why do we drive nations to
arms? Why do we enlist armies to draw up their battle lines amid
the waves? Why do we disturb the seas? I suppose the land is not ex-
tensive enough for all our deaths! Fortune pampers us too much, has
given us over-resilient bodies and blessed good health! Misfortunes
do not attack and devastate us! Each of us can measure out our years
in comfort and sprint home to old age! So let us head for the seas
and call the neglectful fates down on our own heads!
(9) Wretched people, what are you looking for? Death, which is
abundantly available everywhere? It will fetch you from your beds,
but make sure you are innocent when it fetches you; it will seize you
in your homes, but make sure you are plotting no evil when it seizes85
on winds
you. What else could it be called but insanity, to carry danger around
with you and attack unknown people, to be angry without being
wronged, to destroy everything in your path, and to kill someone you
do not hate, as wild animals do? Yet animals bite either in retaliation
or through hunger: without sparing our own blood or anyone else’s,
we put our hands to work, we launch ships, we entrust our safety
to the waves, and we pray for favorable winds—and for us success
consists in being transported to war. (10) How far our wrongdoings
have brought us! Madness within one’s own part of the world is not
enough. That is why the king of Persia,38 stupid man, will cross over to
Greece; his army will not defeat the country even though it has filled
it. That is why Alexander will want the regions beyond the Bactrians
and the Indians, and will try to find out what lies beyond the great
sea,39 and will be aggrieved that he meets a dead end. That is why
greed will deliver Crassus to the Parthians;40 he will not tremble at
the curses of the tribune who calls him back, nor at the storms on
the long sea voyage, nor at the prophetic lightning-bolts and hostile
gods by the Euphrates; he will face the anger of men and gods to
reach gold.
(11) So it would not be unreasonable to say that nature would
have treated us better if she had banned the winds from blowing,
had prevented madmen from rushing off in all directions, and had
ordered everyone to stay in his own land. Then, if nothing else, each
person’s birth would bring evil only on himself and his own people.
But as it is, domestic evils are not enough for me; I must suffer
foreign ones as well. (12) No land is so remote that it cannot export
some evil of its own. How do I know whether at this moment some
obscure lord of a great people, puffed up by fortune’s kindness, is no
longer confining his armed forces to his own territory, whether he is
building fleets, pursuing unknown plans? How do I know whether
this wind or that is bringing me war? Shutting down the seas would
be a large contribution to human peace.
(13) Yet, as I was saying a short while ago,41 we cannot complain
about god our maker if we have corrupted his good gifts and made
them the opposite. He gave the winds to control the temperature
of the sky and the earth, to elicit and restrict the flow of water, to
nurture the fruit of crops and trees. This is brought to ripeness, along
with other causes, by shaking in the wind, which draws nourishmentbook five
86
up to the top of the plants and keeps them moving to prevent wilting.
(14) He gave the winds to enable exploration of distant regions: for
human beings would have been ignorant creatures, without much
experience of the world, if they were confined by the boundaries of
their native soil. He gave the winds so that the benefits of each region
would be shared, not so that they could convey legions and cavalry,
nor so that they could transport the destructive armies of the nations.
(15) If we measure nature’s benefits according to the depravity of
those who use them, we have received all of them to our detriment.
What good does sight or speech do anyone? Who does not find life
a torment? You will discover nothing of such manifest usefulness
that it cannot be turned into the opposite by wrongdoing. So nature
devised winds as well to do good: we ourselves have made them do
the opposite. (16) They all lead us into some evil. Each person has a
different reason for setting sail, but none has a sound one. We are
driven by various temptations to brave the sea; the voyage inevitably
serves some vice. It is a fine saying of Plato, whom we must now call
as a witness near the end, that the things people purchase with their
lives are trivial.42 What is more, my dearest Lucilius, if you correctly
assess their madness—which means ours, since we are floundering
in the same crowd—you will laugh even more when you reflect that
the very things on which lives are wasted are acquired for the sake
of life.43