Natural QuestionsBook 3 [originally Book 1 ]
<On Terrestrial Waters>
(praef.1) I am not unaware, Lucilius, excellent man, of how great is
the enterprise whose foundations I am laying in my old age, now
that I have decided to traverse the world, to seek out its causes and
secrets, and to present them for others to learn about. When shall I
investigate things so numerous, gather together things so scattered,
examine things so inaccessible? (2) Old age is at my back and accuses
me of having used up my years in fruitless pursuits. Let us press on
all the more, and let hard work repair the losses of a misspent life. Let
night be added to day, let business affairs be cut back, let there be no
more anxiety about family estates situated far from their owner, let
the mind have time entirely to itself, let it turn to contemplation of
itself, at least in its final stages. (3) It will do so, it will drive itself on,
and each day it will measure the short time left; whatever has been
lost, it will recover by using its present life with care. One can rely
on the transition from remorse to honorable action.
So I want to shout out these lines by the eminent poet:1
We raise our mighty spirits and in a brief time
attempt the greatest deeds.
I would say this if I were embarking on the project as a boy or young
man (for any length of time would be too limited for such a great
enterprise); but as it is we have started a serious, significant, end-
less project in our afternoon hours. (4) Let us do what is normal on
journeys: those who have set out rather late rely on speed to make
up the delay. Let us hurry, and let us tackle a task that is perhaps
insuperable, certainly great, without using old age as an excuse. My
mind grows in stature whenever it sees the size of the undertaking,
and it ponders how much of the enterprise, not how much of its own
life, still remains.
(5) Some people have worn themselves out writing down the
deeds of foreign kings and the sufferings and audacities perpetrated
by nations against each other. How much better it is to extinguish
one’s own evils than to transmit the evils of others to posterity! How
25book three
26
much more important to praise the works of the gods rather than
the robberies of Philip or of Alexander, and of others who became
famous by destroying nations and were no lesser disasters to mortals
than a flood that has swept over all the plains, or a conflagration
in which a large proportion of living things has gone up in flames!
(6) They write of how Hannibal overcame the Alps; how he unex-
pectedly brought to Italy a war that had gathered strength from
the disasters in Spain; how when his power was broken, even after
Carthage,2 he stubbornly wandered from one king to the next, of-
fering them a commander against the Romans, asking for an army;
and how as an old man he did not stop looking for war in every nook
and cranny: he could manage without a homeland, but not without
an enemy!
(7) How much better it is to ask what ought to be done3 rather
than what has been done, and to teach those who have entrusted
everything to fortune that she has granted nothing enduring, that
all her gifts blow away more rapidly than a breeze! For she cannot
keep still, she delights in replacing joy with sorrow, or at least in
blending them. So let no one be confident when things go well, or
give up when they go badly: events swing back and forth. (8) Why
are you rejoicing? You do not know when the sources of your elation
will desert you: they will end when it suits them, not you. Why are
you downcast? You have hit the bottom, now there is the opportunity
to rise up again. (9) Adverse circumstances change for the better,
desirable ones for the worse. So one must grasp the vicissitudes not
just of private households, which a slight misfortune can overthrow,
but of ruling households too. Kingdoms have risen from the lowest
levels and towered over their rulers, ancient empires have collapsed at
the peak of their prosperity, and it is impossible to count how many
empires have been destroyed by others. At this very moment god is
building up some, overthrowing others, and not putting them down
gently but hurling them from their pinnacle so that nothing will be
left. (10) We believe such things are great because we are small: many
things derive their greatness not from their intrinsic nature but from
our lowly status.
What is most important in human life? Not filling the seas with
fleets, nor setting up standards on the shore of the Red Sea, nor,
when the earth runs out of sources of harm, wandering the ocean27
on terr estr i a l water s
to seek the unknown; rather it is seeing everything with one’s mind,
and conquering one’s faults, which is the greatest victory possible.
There are countless people who have been in control of nations and
cities, very few who have been in control of themselves. (11) What is
most important? Raising your mind above the threats and promises
of fortune, thinking that nothing is worth hoping for. For what have
you to desire? Whenever you sink back from engagement with the
divine to the human level, your sight will go dim, just like the eyes of
those who return from bright sunlight to dense shadow. (12) What
is most important? Being able to endure adversity with a glad mind,
to experience whatever happens as though you wanted it to happen
to you. For you ought to have wanted it to, if you had known that
everything happens according to god’s decree. Crying, complaining,
and moaning are rebellion. (13) What is most important? A mind
that is brave and defiant in the face of calamity, not just opposed
but hostile to luxury, neither courting nor fleeing danger; one that
knows not to wait for fortune but to create it, to go to face both
forms4 unafraid and undismayed, unshaken either by the turmoil
of the one or the glitter of the other. (14) What is most important?
Refusing to let bad intentions enter your mind; raising pure hands
to heaven; not seeking any good thing if someone else must give it
or must lose it so that it may pass to you; wishing for a sound mind
(something that can be wished for without competition); regarding
the other things rated highly by mortals, even if some chance brings
them into your home, as likely to exit by the door they entered.
(15) What is most important? Raising your spirits high above chance
events; remembering your human status, so that if you are fortunate,
you know that will not last long, and if you are unfortunate, you know
you are not so if you do not think so. (16) What is most important?
Having your soul on your lips.5 This makes you free not according to
the law of the Quirites, but according to the law of nature.6 A free
person is one who escapes enslavement to himself, which is constant,
unavoidable, oppressing by day and by night equally, without break,
without respite.7 (17) Enslavement to oneself is the most severe en-
slavement, but it is easy to shake it off if you stop expecting a lot from
yourself, if you stop making money for yourself, if you set before your
eyes both your nature and your age, even if it is very young, and say
to yourself, “Why am I going crazy? Why am I panting? Why am Ibook three
28
sweating? Why am I working the land, or the forum? 8 I don’t need
much, and not for long.”
(18) For these reasons9 it will be useful for us to investigate nature:
first, we shall leave behind what is sordid; next, we shall keep our
mind, which needs to be elevated and great, separated from the body;
next, when our critical faculty has been exercised on hidden matters,
it will be no worse at dealing with visible ones. And nothing is more
visible than these remedies which are learned in order to counter our
wickedness and madness, things we condemn but do not forsake.
(1.1) So let us inquire about terrestrial waters,10 and let us investi-
gate how they occur—whether, as Ovid says, “There was a spring free
from mud, silvery, with bright waves,”11 or, as Virgil says,
from where through nine mouths, with a huge roar coming
from the mountain,
the sea bursts forth, and covers the fields with the sounding
waves,12
or, as I find in your poetry, my dearest Lucilius,13 “The Elean river
leaps out from Sicilian springs,”14 or some <other> cause supplies
the water—how so many huge rivers flow day and night, why some
swell with winter waters, others rise when the other rivers are subsid-
ing. (2) For the present we shall separate the Nile from the crowd,
since it has its own unique character, and we shall assign a special
date to it.15 Now let us look at ordinary waters, cold as well as hot
(in their case we shall need to inquire whether they are created hot
or become so). We shall also discuss others distinguished either by
flavor or by some useful property: for some benefit the eyes, some the
muscles, some cure chronic ailments where the doctors have given
up hope, some heal ulcers, some, when taken as a drink, give relief
internally and alleviate complaints of the lungs or internal organs,
some staunch bleeding.
(2.1) The tastes of individual waters are as varied as their uses.
Some are sweet, others are pungent to various degrees: for there are
salt and bitter ones, or medicinal ones, some of which we describe
as flavored with sulphur, iron, or alum. The taste indicates the effect.
(2) There are many other distinctions, first of touch (there are cold
and hot), then of weight (there are light and heavy), then of color
(there are pure, muddy, blue, bright), then of healthiness (there are29
on terr estr i a l water s
beneficial ones and deadly ones). There are waters that become solidi-
fied into stone, some thin, some dense. Some provide nourishment,
some pass through without any benefit to the drinker, some when
drunk promote fertility.
(3) <All waters are either stationary or moving; either they are
collected or they have various veins.>16 The lie of the land determines
that water either stands still or flows: on a slope it flows; on level
or low-lying land it is retained and forms pools. Sometimes it is
pushed uphill by breath:17 but then it is being forced, not flowing. It
is collected from rainfall; from its own spring it emerges naturally.
But there is nothing to prevent water from both being collected and
emerging naturally in the same spot, as we see in the Fucine lake:
the surrounding mountains channel into it any rain water that pours
down, but there are large, hidden veins in the lake itself. So even after
the winter torrents have flowed down, it preserves its appearance.
(4) So first let us investigate how the earth has the resources to
maintain the flow of the rivers, and where all that water comes from.
We are surprised that the seas do not register the arrival of water
from the rivers: we should be equally surprised that the earth does
not register the loss as they flow away. What is it that either has
filled the earth up so that it can provide all this from some hidden
reservoir, or else continuously replenishes it? Whatever explanation
we give for rivers will also apply to streams and springs.
(5) Some people think that the earth immediately receives back
all the water it has discharged; so the seas do not get bigger because
they do not absorb what has flowed into them, but at once give it
back. The water passes below the earth in hidden channels, and what
arrived openly returns secretly. The sea is filtered along its course,
because it is pounded as it goes through the numerous twists and
turns within the earth, and loses its bitterness and disagreeableness;
thanks to all the variety of soils, it sheds its flavor and turns into
pure water.
(6.1) Some people think that the earth discharges again every-
thing that it receives from rainfall, and they offer this argument:
that there are very few rivers in those regions where rainfall is rare.
(2) They say that the deserts of Ethiopia are dry and that few springs
are found in the interior of Africa because the climate is boiling hot
and virtually always like summer. So the sands lie barren, withoutbook three
30
trees, without cultivation, since they are moistened by only infre-
quent rain, which they at once swallow up. On the other hand, it is
well known that Germany, Gaul, and, where it borders on them, Italy,
are awash with streams and awash with rivers because they have a
damp climate, and not even the summer is free from rain.
(7.1) You see that many objections can be brought against this
view. First, I, who am devoted to digging my vineyards, assure you
that no rainfall is heavy enough to wet the soil to a depth of more
than ten feet. All the moisture is absorbed in the outer crust, and
does not descend lower down. (2) So how can rain support powerful
rivers, when it moistens only the surface of the earth? “But most of
the rain is carried off in river channels to the sea. The earth absorbs
only a little, and does not retain even that: for either it is dry and
soaks up whatever pours down onto it, or it has had its fill, and repels
anything that falls surplus to its desires. Therefore rivers are not swol-
len by the first rainfalls, because the thirsty earth sucks them all into
itself.” (3) But just think of how some rivers burst out from rocks and
mountains. What will rain contribute to them, since it runs down
over bare crags and has no soil to soak into? Add that in the driest
locations wells are sunk to a depth of two or three hundred feet or
more, and discover rich veins of water at a depth to which rainwater
does not penetrate; you will realize that down there it is not celestial
water, nor collected water, but so-called living water. (4) This view is
refuted by the following argument too: some springs well up on the
very highest summits of mountains. It is clear that they are driven
upward, or are created there, since all rainwater runs downward.
(8) Some people think that, just as on the outer surface of the
earth there are huge marshes and great, navigable lakes, and just as
seas stretch out across huge areas and flow into fjords, so the interior
of the earth abounds in fresh water, which forms lakes just as broad
as the ocean and its gulfs in our world, or rather all the broader,
because deep down the earth spreads out further. So those rivers
are discharged from that deep-seated supply. Why are you surprised
that the earth does not register their removal, since the seas do not
register their arrival?
(9.1) Some people support the following explanation: they say
the earth has hollow cavities inside itself, and a lot of breath, which,
being buried in deep darkness, is inevitably cold. Being sluggish31
on terr estr i a l water s
and immobile, once it is unable to sustain itself, it turns to water.
(2) Just as above us transformation of the atmosphere produces rain,
so beneath the earth it produces a river or a stream. Above us it
cannot remain sluggish and oppressive for long (for sometimes it
is rarefied by the sun, sometimes it is expanded by winds, and so
there are long intervals between rain showers); but below the earth
whatever converts it to water is always the same—endless darkness,
everlasting cold, inert denseness; so it will constantly be generating
springs or rivers. (3) We believe that earth is subject to change; and
any exhalations it gives off, since they are not dispersed in the open
air, at once grow dense and turn into liquid. Here you have the first
explanation of how water is produced under the earth.
(10.1) You can add that everything is produced from everything—
air from water, water from air, fire from air, air from fire.18 So why
should water not be produced from earth as well? If it can change
into other things, it can change into water too, or rather, especially
into water. For both things are related, both are heavy, both are dense,
both are driven to one of the extremities of the world.19 Earth is
produced from water: why shouldn’t water be produced from earth?
(2) “But rivers are big.” When you see their size, look also at the size
of what they come from. Since they flow steadily, and some rush
along rapidly, you are surprised that renewed supplies of water are
constantly available to them. You might as well be surprised that,
when winds move the entire atmosphere, breath is not exhausted
but flows constantly day and night, and that it does not move in
a fixed channel, as rivers do, but travels on a broad front across a
huge expanse of the sky! You might as well be surprised that there
is any wave left to follow behind all those that have already broken!
(3) Nothing is exhausted if it returns to itself. There are reciprocal
exchanges between all the elements: whatever one loses turns into
another, and nature weighs its parts as if they were placed on a pair
of scales, to make sure that the world does not become unbalanced
because the equality of its components is disturbed. (4) Everything is
in everything. Not only does air turn into fire, but it is never without
fire: take away its heat and it will grow stiff, stand still, become hard.
Air turns to moisture, but nevertheless it is not without moisture.
Earth produces both air and water, but it is never without water any
more than it is without air. So the mutual transformations are easierbook three
32
because the things they are due to change into are already mixed in
with them. (5) Thus the earth contains moisture, and it forces it out. It
contains air, which the darkness of the subterranean cold condenses,
so as to produce moisture. The earth can itself change into moisture
too, and it exploits its own nature.
(11.1) “But tell me,” someone says, “If the causes of the appearance
of rivers and springs are everlasting, why do they sometimes dry up
and sometimes emerge in places where they did not exist previously?”
Often the channels are disturbed by an earthquake, and subsidence
severs the water’s route; the blocked water seeks new exits and attacks
at some point, or is diverted from one place to another by the up-
heaval in the earth itself. (2) In our experience it commonly happens
that rivers whose channels are blocked at first flow backward, then,
since they have lost their way, they make another. Theophrastus20
says that this happened on mount Corycus, on which new springs
emerged after an earthquake. (3) He thinks that other causes too can
come into play and either elicit water or deflect and divert it from its
course. Once mount Haemus was short of water, but when a tribe of
Gauls that was blockaded by Cassander took to the mountain and
chopped down the forests,21 an enormous supply of water appeared;
obviously the woods were drawing on this for their nourishment, and
when they were felled, the liquid was no longer used up on the trees
and flowed above ground. (4) Theophrastus says that the same also
happened near Magnesia. But, with all due respect to him, this is not
plausible, because generally the places with most shade have the most
water, and that would not be the case if trees dried up the water sup-
ply. They get their nourishment from near the surface, but rivers flow
from deep within and are generated beyond the depth to which roots
can extend. Then trees that have been cut down need more moisture:
for they soak up enough not just to stay alive, but to grow.
(5) He also says that near Arcadia, which was a city on the island
of Crete, springs and streams stopped flowing because the land was
no longer cultivated after the city was destroyed; but when it got its
farmers back, it got its waters back too. He suggests that the reason
for the drought was that the earth solidified and hardened, and, left
undisturbed, it could not let the rainwater penetrate. But in that case
why do we see many springs in completely deserted places? (6) And33
on terr estr i a l water s
we can find more places that began to be cultivated because of their
water than places that began to have water because they were being
cultivated. It is not rainwater that causes enormous rivers that can
accommodate large boats immediately below their source: you can
infer this from the fact that throughout winter and summer the flow
from the source remains constant. Rain can produce a torrent, but
not a river that flows between its banks with a steady current; rain
does not produce it, but speeds it up.
(12.1) Let us look at this again a bit more deeply, if you agree, and
then you will know that you have no further questions to ask, since
you have arrived at the true origin of rivers. Without doubt a per-
petual supply and flow of water produces a river. So you ask me how
water is produced? I shall ask in turn how air or earth is produced.
(2) But if there are four elements in nature, you cannot ask where
water comes from: for it is one-quarter of nature. So why are you
surprised that such a large portion of nature can constantly pour
something out from itself ? (3) Just as air, which is also a quarter of
the world, makes winds and breezes move, so water makes streams
and rivers move. If wind is flowing air, a river is flowing water too. I
have granted water more than enough power when I have said, “It
is an element”; you realize that what proceeds from it cannot peter
out. (13.1) I shall add, as Thales says,22 that “it is the most power-
ful element.” He thinks that it was the first element, and everything
arose from it. We too hold the same opinion, or something close to
it: for we say that it is fire that seizes control of the world and turns
everything into itself;23 then it becomes faint and weak and dies down,
and when the fire is extinguished, nothing else is left in nature except
moisture. The hope of a future world lies hidden in it. (2) So fire is the
end of the world, and moisture is its starting-point. Are you surprised
that rivers can constantly emerge from the substance that stood in for
everything and from which everything comes? As things separated
out it was reduced to a quarter share, in a location where it could
provide sufficient material to produce rivers, streams, and springs.
(14.1) The following theory of Thales’ 24 is silly. He says that the
earth is supported by water and floats like a ship, and it is being
tossed by the waves, thanks to its mobility, when it is said to be quak-
ing: “So it is not surprising if it overflows with moisture that can pourbook three
34
out rivers, since it is all floating on moisture.” (2) Boo this old, naive
theory off the stage: <***> and you have no reason to think that water
enters the earth through cracks and forms bilge-water.25
The Egyptians posited four elements, from each of which a pair
is formed: they think that air is male when it is wind, female when it
is misty and still; they call the sea “virile water,” and all other water
“womanly”; they call fire “masculine” when it burns with a flame, and
“female” when it shines, harmless to the touch; stronger earth, such
as rocks and crags, they call “male,” and they give the name “female”
to workable, cultivated soil. (3) The sea is all one, established as such
from the beginning, of course; it has its own veins from which it is re-
newed and forms tides. Just like the sea, so this gentler water has vast,
hidden reserves, which no river’s current will exhaust. The scale of its
resources is hidden, but enough is emitted to allow a constant flow.
(15.1) There are some points here that we can vote for, but I would
add this to the motion:26 I think that the earth is controlled by na-
ture, and on the model of our own bodies, in which there are both
veins and arteries; the former are receptacles for blood, the latter
for breath. In the earth too there are some passages through which
water runs, others through which breath does; and nature has cre-
ated such a resemblance to the human body that our ancestors too
spoke of “veins” of water. (2) Now, in us there is not just blood but
many kinds of fluid, some essential, some corrupted and rather too
thick; in the head there is the brain, mucus, saliva, and tears; in the
bones, marrow and something added to the joints as a lubricant so
that they can bend more readily. In just the same way in the earth as
well there are several kinds of fluid: (3) some that harden when fully
developed (from them comes the entire harvest of metals—from
which greed seeks out gold and silver—and substances that turn
from liquid to stone),27 and some that are formed from the decay of
earth and moisture (such as bitumen and other things of that sort).
This is the explanation for the kinds of water that come into being
according to the law and will of nature.
(4) But, as in our bodies, so in the earth liquids often go bad:
either a blow, or some upheaval, or the old age of the location, or
cold, or heat corrupts their nature; a festering process forms a liq-
uid, which may be either long-lasting or short-lived. (5) Now, in our35
on terr estr i a l water s
bodies, when a vein has been severed, the blood runs until it has all
flowed out, or until the cut in the vein <has healed> and the bleeding
has subsided and been staunched, or some other factor has checked
the flow of the blood; and in just the same way in the earth, when
veins are unsealed and opened, a stream or river runs out. (6) The
size of the vein that is opened makes a difference: sometimes it gives
out when the water is exhausted; sometimes it is blocked by some
obstacle; sometimes it heals over with a scar, as it were, and seals off
the path it had opened up; sometimes the earth, which we have said
is subject to change,28 loses its ability to convert its nourishment into
moisture. (7) But on occasion what is exhausted can be renewed:
sometimes it recovers its own strength; sometimes strength is trans-
ferred from elsewhere. For empty things placed next to full ones
often divert moisture to themselves; often earth, if it putrefies easily,
is itself dissolved and liquefied. The same occurs below the earth as
in the clouds, that <the air> is condensed, and, when too heavy to re-
main in its natural state, it produces moisture; often a thin, dispersed
liquid collects like dew, and trickles from many directions into one
place (water-diviners call it sweat, because drops are either extruded
by the pressure in the region or are extracted by heat). (8) This feeble
trickle is scarcely sufficient for a spring. But from large caverns and
large reservoirs there emerge rivers, sometimes issuing gently, if the
water just flows downhill under its own weight, sometimes violently
and noisily, if breath is mixed in with it and forces it out.
(16.1) “But why are some springs full for six hours and dry for six?”
It is unnecessary to name individual rivers that are wide in certain
months and narrow in certain others, and to look for an opportunity
to tell tall stories, seeing that I can give the same explanation for them
all. (2) Just as quartan fever turns up on the hour,29 just as gout keeps to
time, just as menstruation sticks to a set day if nothing intervenes, just
as childbirth is ready to happen in the right month, in just the same
way waters have intervals at which they withdraw and return. Some
intervals are shorter, and therefore striking; others are longer but no
less fixed. (3) Is it surprising when you see the chain of events and
nature advancing as preordained? Winter never goes astray; summer
heats up at the right time; the change to autumn and spring occurs at
the usual point; solstices and equinoxes alike recur on the right day.book three
36
(4) Beneath the earth too there are laws of nature that are less
well known to us, but no less fixed. Believe that whatever you see
above happens below. There are vast caves there too, there are huge
depressions and empty spaces with mountains towering above on ev-
ery side, there are sheer, bottomless holes that have often swallowed
cities that subsided into them and have buried enormous ruins in
the depths (5)—these are filled with breath, for there is no vacuum
anywhere—<there are> also pools oppressed by darkness and broad
lakes. Living creatures live in them too, but they are sluggish and
imperfectly formed, since they are generated in air that is dark and
dense, and water that is stagnant; they are mostly blind, like moles
and underground mice, which have no vision because it is redundant.
That is why, as Theophrastus declares,30 fish are dug out of the ground
in some places.
(17.1) At this point you can think of many witty things to say, as
with some tall story: “To think of someone going fishing not with
nets or hooks but with a pick-axe! I’m waiting for someone to go
hunting in the sea!” But why should fish not cross over to the land,
if we have crossed the seas and found new homes? (2) Are you sur-
prised by this? How much more incredible are the achievements of
luxury! How often it either fakes or surpasses nature! Fish swim on a
couch, and one is caught beneath the table to be transferred onto the
table immediately. A mullet does not seem fresh enough unless it has
died in the guest’s hand. They are put in glass bowls and brought in,
and as they die people watch their color; death causes many altera-
tions to it, as their breathing struggles. They kill other fish in the fish
sauce, and marinate them while still alive. (3) Where does that leave
people who think it just a tall story that a fish can live under the earth
and be dug up instead of caught? How incredible it would seem to
them if they heard of a fish swimming in fish sauce, and being killed
not for dinner but at dinner, after it had been treated like a pet for
ages and had fed the eyes before it fed the gullet!
(18.1) Allow me to put our inquiry to one side for a short while
and castigate luxury. “There is nothing,” you say, “more beautiful than
that dying mullet. As the act of struggling weakens its breathing, first
it is suffused with redness, then with pallor; its scales keep changing
hue, and its color shifts through shades poised uncertainly between
life and death. Luxury has long been lethargic, idle, and negligent,37
on terr estr i a l water s
and has only just woken up, has only just realized that it was being
cheated and defrauded of something so fine. Up till now only fisher-
men enjoyed such a beautiful sight. (2) Why bring me a cooked fish?
Why a dead one? Let it breathe its last on the serving dish.” We used
to be surprised that they were so fussy that they would not touch a
fish unless it had been caught the same day, and, as they say, it really
tasted of the sea. So it was brought at a run, so the road was cleared
for couriers who raced along panting and shouting. (3) How their
self-indulgence has progressed! Now they regard a dead fish as rot-
ten. “It was caught today.” “I can’t trust you on this important matter.
I’ve got to see for myself. Bring it here, let it expire in front of me.”
The stomachs of the gourmets have become so fastidious that they
cannot sample anything they have not seen swimming and twitching
at the dinner-party itself. How the resourcefulness of deadly luxury
has increased! Madness that despises the familiar devises each day
something so much more subtle and more elegant! (4) We used to
hear people say, “Nothing is better than a rock mullet,” but now we
hear, “Nothing is more beautiful than a dying mullet. Let me hold
the glass vessel for it to leap and quiver in.” After they have sung
its praises for ages, it is removed from that transparent aquarium.
(5) Then each person, according to his expertise, points and says,
“See how that red color has flared up, more vivid than any red pig-
ment! See those veins running along its sides! Look, you’d think its
stomach was full of blood! Look, brilliant white coloring, and blue,
has appeared below its forehead! Now it is stretching out and going
pale and turning to a single color.” (6) None of these people sits by
a dying friend, none can endure seeing the death of his own father,
though he has prayed for it.31 Hardly any of them follows a family
funeral procession to the pyre! The final hour of a brother or neighbor
is deserted, but people race to the death of a mullet: “For nothing is
more beautiful than that!” (7) I cannot stop myself from using words
recklessly from time to time and crossing the boundary of propriety:
in an eating-place they are not content with teeth, and stomach, and
mouth; they are gluttons with their eyes as well.
(19.1) But, to return to my subject, listen to evidence that there
are large quantities of water hidden below the earth, and that they
produce fish whose inactivity makes them repulsive. If this water
ever emerges, it brings with it a great mass of living creatures, ghastlybook three
38
to look at and disgusting and harmful to taste. (2) Certainly when
such water sprang up in Caria near the city of Idymus, the new river
exposed fish to a sky they had never known till that day, and every-
one who ate them died. This is not surprising, for their bodies were
plump and bloated, as a result of long indolence; they had had no
exercise, and had been fattened by the darkness and deprived of light,
on which sound health depends. (3) An indication that fish can live
at that depth below the earth may come from the fact that eels are
generated in concealed locations. They too are an indigestible food
because of their idleness, especially if they are completely hidden by
deep mud.
(4) So the earth contains not just veins of water which can be
channeled together to produce streams, but also rivers of vast size,
some of which flow out of sight all the time; <others flow in the open
for a while> until they are swallowed up by some hollow in the earth;
others emerge beneath some lake. For who does not know that there
are some pools that are bottomless? Why is this relevant? To make it
clear that this water provides everlasting material for great rivers. Its
bottom cannot be reached, as the sources of rivers can.32
(20.1) “But why does water have different tastes?” From four
causes: first, from the soil it passes through; second, also from the
soil, if it is transformed into water; third, from breath that is recon-
figured as water; fourth, from the taint that water often suffers when
damaged and corrupted. (2) These causes give water different flavors,
give it medicinal power, give it unwholesome breath and a harmful
smell, give it lightness and heaviness, and give it an excess of either
heat or cold. It is important if the water passes through places full of
sulphur or potash or bitumen, for one risks one’s life drinking water
corrupted in that way. (3) Hence what Ovid writes about:
The Cicones have a river which when drunk turns the vital
organs to stone, which covers what it touches in marble;33
it is medicinal, and contains a slimy substance that has the property
of sticking to bodies and hardening them. Just as pozzolana,34 if it
comes into contact with water, turns to stone, so, conversely, this
water, if it touches a solid, adheres and sticks to it. (4) That is how
things thrown into Lake *** have turned to stone when they are later
pulled out.35 This happens in certain places in Italy: if you submergethe river of the Lynceii;
if anyone gulps it down his unrestrained throat,
he staggers around just as if he had drunk neat wine.37
(21.1) People who have looked down into certain caves die. The
poison is so swift-acting that it strikes down birds as they fly past.
Such is the air, such is the region from which the deathly water
seeps. If the infection in the air and the region is less severe, the harm
done is more moderate too, and it merely affects the muscles, which
are paralyzed as if by drunkenness. (2) I am not surprised that the
region and the air infect the water and make it resemble the places
through which and from which it comes. The flavor of the fodder
appears in milk, and the character of the wine is found in vinegar;
there is nothing that does not show traces of the thing from which
it has originated.
(22) There is another kind of water that we believe began with
the world: if it is eternal, this water has always existed too, or if it
has some starting point, this water too was organized along with
everything else. What is this water, you ask? The ocean and the seas
that branch off it and flow into the land. Some people also think
that the rivers whose nature is inexplicable originated along with the
world itself, for instance the Danube and the Nile, enormous rivers,
too remarkable to allow us to say that they have the same origin as
the rest. (23) So waters can be classified as follows, it would appear:
some <came into being along with the world, some> after it; of the
39
on terr estr i a l water s
a stick or a blade of grass or foliage, you pull out a stone a few days
later. For the slime envelops the object and gradually forms a coating
on it. You will find this less surprising if you observe that the water
at Albulae, and sulphurous water generally, hardens on its channels
and pipes.
(5) One of these causes applies to those lakes “which, if anyone
swallows them,” as the same poet says, “he either goes mad or falls
into an amazingly heavy slumber.”36 They have an effect similar to
neat wine, but stronger: for just as drunkenness, until it is dried out, is
a kind of madness, or else falls into an exceedingly heavy sleep, so the
sulphurous power of this water, containing a strong poison derived
from the harmful air, either drives the mind mad or overpowers it
with slumber. (6) This is the harmful effect ofbook three
40
latter, <some are terrestrial, some> are celestial, emitted by the clouds;
of the terrestrial ones, some, so to speak, float on top, for they creep
over the earth’s surface; others are hidden, and I have given an ac-
count of them.
(24.1) Why are some waters hot—some actually so boiling hot
that they cannot be used unless they have either cooled off in the open
or have been made lukewarm by the addition of cold water? Several
explanations are given. Empedocles thinks that the water is heated by
the fires that the earth conceals underground in many locations,38 if
they are underneath the soil through which the water passes. (2) We
are used to constructing water-heaters, and boilers, and various de-
vices in which we arrange pipes of thin copper that spiral round and
slope gently down, so that the water repeatedly circles round the
same fire, and flows a sufficient distance for it to absorb the heat. So
the water enters cold and flows out hot. (3) Empedocles thinks that
the same happens beneath the earth. He is not mistaken—believe the
people of Baiae, whose baths are heated without fire. Boiling hot
breath is channeled into them from a hot location; flowing through
pipes, it heats the walls and the pools in the baths in exactly the same
way as under-floor fire. All the cold water becomes hot as it passes,
and it does not absorb any flavor from the furnace-room, because it
is enclosed as it flows past. (4) Some people think that as water passes
through places full of sulphur or potash it gains heat thanks to the
material through which it is flowing. They appeal to the evidence of
the smell and taste; for the water reproduces the characteristics of the
substance that has heated it. To save yourself from being surprised
that this happens, pour water over quicklime, and it will boil.
(25.1) Some waters are deadly, but have no distinctive smell or
taste. Near Nonacris in Arcadia the Styx, as it is called by the lo-
cal population, deceives visitors, because neither appearance nor
smell make it suspect, rather like the poisons of the great experts,
which can only be detected upon death. This water I was just talking
about causes harm extremely swiftly, and there is no opportunity to
take an antidote, because as soon as it is drunk it hardens; like gyp-
sum it solidifies under water, and it makes the vital organs seize up.
(2) There is equally harmful water in Thessaly near Tempe; both wild
and farm animals avoid it. It penetrates iron and bronze, so great is41
on terr estr i a l water s
its ability to corrode even hard objects. It does not support any trees
either, and it kills plants.
(3) Some rivers have remarkable powers. For there are some that
when drunk dye flocks of sheep, and within a certain time sheep
that were black have white wool, and those that arrived white go
away black. In Boeotia two rivers have this effect, one of which is
called Melas from its effect.39 They each flow out of the same lake,
to produce different results. (4) In Macedonia too, according to
Theophrastus,40 people who want to make their sheep white bring
them <to the Haliacmon>;41 when they have drunk from it for a
while, they change color just as if they had been dyed. But if they
need dark wool, a free dyer is to hand: they drive the same flock to
the Peneus. I have good authorities for there being in Galatia a river
that has the same effect on all animals, and one in Cappadocia that
when drunk changes the color of horses, though of no other animal,
and produces white markings on their skin.
(5) It is well-known that there are some lakes that buoy up non-
swimmers. In Sicily there used to be, and in Syria there still is a
pool on which bricks float, and things thrown in cannot sink, even
if they are heavy. The reason for this is obvious. Weigh anything you
like, and put water on the other side of the scales, making sure you
have the same volume of each. If the water is heavier, it will support
the object that is lighter than itself, and the lighter it is, the more
it will stand out above the water; [heavier things will sink;]42 but if
the weights of the water and of the other thing you are weighing it
against are equal, it will neither go to the bottom nor stand out, but
will be level with the water and will float, but almost submerged and
not protruding at any point. (6) That is why some pieces of timber
are carried almost entirely above the water, some are half submerged,
some sink till they are level with the water. For when the weight of
each is equal, neither thing gives in to the other; heavier things sink,
lighter things are supported. However, heavy and light depend not
on our assessment but on comparison with the thing that is to buoy
them up. (7) So when water is heavier than the body of a man or of
a rock, it does not allow what does not overcome it to sink. That is
how it happens that in some pools not even stones go to the bottom.
I am talking about solid, hard ones, for many stones are pumice-book three
42
like and light. In Lydia there are islands formed from them that
float; Theophrastus is the authority for this.43 (8) I myself have seen
a floating island at Cutiliae; another floats on lake Vadimon (that
is a lake in the territory of Statonia). The island at Cutiliae has trees
and supports plants too, but it is carried by the water and is driven
to and fro not just by a wind but by a breeze; it never stays put in
one place for a day and a night, so easily is it moved by a gentle gust.
(9) There is a twofold explanation for this: the weight of the water
that is medicinal and therefore heavy; and the material of the island
itself, which is capable of floating and does not have a solid body,
even though it supports trees. Perhaps the dense liquid has assembled
and bound together light tree-trunks and leafy branches that were
scattered across the lake. (10) So even if there are rocks in the is-
land, you will find they are eroded and porous, of the type produced
by a hardened liquid, especially around <the mouths> of medicinal
springs and streams where the impurities in the water have coalesced,
and the foam is solidified. Anything formed from something insub-
stantial and loose-textured is necessarily light.
(11) Some things cannot be explained: why the water of the Nile
makes women more fertile, so much so that it has loosened the or-
gans of some women, allowing conception, after they had been closed
by a long period of infertility; and why some waters in Lycia pro-
tect women’s pregnancies and are often sought out by those whose
wombs are not very retentive. As far as I am concerned, I treat these
as ill-founded rumors. It is believed that some waters cause eczema
to appear on the body, some cause psoriasis and ugly white blotch-
ing, whether through external contact or when drunk. They say that
this defect is found in water collected from dew. (12) Who could fail
to suppose that the waters that form rock-crystal are very dense? 44
But the opposite is true: it involves very light waters, which cold can
freeze very easily precisely because of their lightness. The origin of
this kind of stone is obvious to the Greeks from their word for it, for
they give the name “crystallus” both to this transparent stone and to
the ice from which the stone is believed to come. For celestial water
contains very little earth, and, when it has gone solid, it is made more
and more dense by persistent, long-lasting cold. Eventually all the
air is excluded, the water becomes highly compressed, and what had
been liquid is turned into stone.(4) Thus, after the Lycus has been swallowed by a chasm in the
earth,
it emerges far from here and is reborn from another mouth.
Thus the great Erasinus is at one point imbibed, at another,
after flowing with silent eddies, it is restored among the Argive
waves.48
In the east too the Tigris does the same: it is swallowed up, is missed
for a long time, and eventually emerges in a far-distant place, but
there is no doubt it is the same river.
(5) Some springs eject impurities at regular intervals, as the Are-
thusa in Sicily does every fourth summer, during the Olympics. This
gives rise to the view that the Alpheus travels all that way from
Achaea, flowing under the sea, and only emerges on the shore at
Syracuse; and so on the days when the Olympics are taking place,
43
on terr estr i a l water s
(26.1) Some rivers rise in summer, like the Nile, which will be
dealt with later.45 Theophrastus is the authority for saying that in the
Black Sea too some rivers rise in the summertime.46 People think
there are four explanations. Either it is because at that time earth
can most readily be changed into liquid; or because there is heavier
rain in some remote region, and the rainwater passes through hid-
den tunnels and wells up imperceptibly from below. Third, if the
river mouth is lashed by constant winds, and the river is driven back
by the waves and comes to a halt, it appears to rise because it is not
flowing out. The fourth explanation involves the heavenly bodies:
for in certain months they are more oppressive and drain moisture
from the rivers; when they have moved further away, they consume
and draw up less;47 thus what used to contribute to expenditure con-
tributes to growth.
(3) Some rivers visibly descend into a cave and thus disappear
from sight. Some are gradually absorbed, disappear, and then after
an interval they return and recover their name and their course. The
explanation is clear: there is empty space beneath the earth, and all
liquid naturally descends to a lower point and to an empty space. So
rivers are welcomed there and follow a hidden course; but as soon
as some solid barrier is encountered, they break through at a point
where there is less resistance to their escape and resume their original
course.dung from the sacrificial victims is thrown into the flowing river
and surfaces there. (6) This seemed credible to you, as <I said> at the
start,49 my dearest Lucilius, and to Virgil, who addresses Arethusa:
book three
44
So, when you flow beneath the Sicilian waves,
may bitter Doris not mix her waves with yours.50
In the Rhodian Chersonese there is a spring that after a long period
of time becomes muddy and disgorges the offending material from
deep within, until it is freed and purified. (7) In some places there
are springs that expel not just mud, but also leaves, bits of pottery,
and rotting sediment. The sea does this everywhere, for its nature is
to drive all filth and sewage onto the shores. Some parts of the sea
do this at regular intervals; for example, near Messene and Mylae
the force of the turbulent sea ejects something resembling dung, and
boils and seethes with a disgusting color, giving rise to the myth that
the oxen of the Sun are stabled there. (8) But some things are difficult
to account for, particularly when the timing of what is under investi-
gation is unresearched or uncertain, which means that the immediate
and antecedent cause cannot be established. But this cause is uni-
versal: all standing, confined waters naturally purify themselves. For
in those that are moving, impurities cannot remain, for the force of
the current carries them along and takes them away. Waters that do
not dispatch whatever settles in them become unsettled to a greater
or lesser degree. The sea hauls corpses and equipment and the other
debris of shipwrecks from the depths, and is cleansed not just by
storm and wave, but also when it is peaceful and calm.
(27.1) This topic reminds me to inquire how most of the earth is
overwhelmed by the waves when the fated day of the flood arrives:
is it achieved by the might of the ocean, and does the outer sea come
surging up over us? or does constant, unremitting rain and a persis-
tent winter that squeezes out the summer burst the clouds and hurl
down huge quantities of water? or does the earth pour out rivers more
liberally, and open up new springs? or is there no single explanation
for such a catastrophe, but do all the causes conspire: do the rains
fall, the rivers rise, and the seas stir from their sea-beds and charge
forward, all at once? 51 Does everything attack en masse to destroy
the human race? (2) That is right: nothing is difficult for nature, es-
pecially when she is hurrying toward her own finale. For the creation45
on terr estr i a l water s
of everything, she uses her powers sparingly and rations herself out in
barely perceptible increments; but she arrives at destruction suddenly,
at full speed. What a long time it takes for a baby to continue from
conception through to birth! How much effort goes into raising the
young child! With what careful nourishment the vulnerable body
at last reaches maturity! But how effortlessly it is destroyed! Cities
take an age to establish, an hour to demolish; ashes are produced in
a moment, a forest takes a long time. Everything needs plenty of
protection to survive and flourish, but it disintegrates swiftly and
suddenly. (3) Any deviation by nature from the present state of affairs
is sufficient for the destruction of mortals. So when that inevitable
moment arrives, fate sets in motion many causes at once; for such a
change cannot occur without the world being shaken.
(4) According to what some people, including Fabianus, think,52
first of all excessive rains fall: there is no sunshine, the sky is grim
with clouds, there is constant mist, and the dampness produces thick
gloom, but the winds never dry things out. Then the crops are spoiled,
corn-fields, growing without grain, are ruined. When plants sown
by hand have rotted, marsh grasses grow in all the fields. (5) Soon
stronger plants also suffer damage: roots are loosened, and trees fall
down; vines and shrubs of all sorts are not supported by the soil,
which is soft and muddy; now, being water<-logged>, it does not
even support grass or lush pasture. People are struggling with hunger,
and hands reach out for the foods of olden days; the ilex and the oak
are shaken,53 and so is any tree that stood on high ground, firmly held
by cracks in the rock. (6) Buildings become unsteady and sodden,
foundations subside as the water penetrates down to their base, and
all the ground is under water. There are fruitless attempts to shore up
unsteady buildings, for all the props are planted in slippery, muddy
soil; nothing is firm.
(7) After the storm-clouds attack more and more strongly, and
the snows that have piled up over centuries are melted, a torrent,
tumbling down from the highest mountains, sweeps away unstable
forests and sends dislodged rocks rolling downhill after their cohe-
sion has been weakened. It washes away farmhouses and carries down
flocks mingled with their owners. After grabbing smaller buildings
and carrying them off as it passes, it eventually detours more vio-
lently against larger ones, and sweeps away cities and populationsbook three
46
trapped within their walls, uncertain whether to lament collapse or
shipwreck; for the forces of demolition and of drowning arrive at the
same instant. The torrent grows as it advances, sweeping up other tor-
rents into itself, and it devastates level ground everywhere. Finally it
pours into the seas, laden with the vast wreckage of nations.
(8) Rivers that are huge by nature and swift-flowing even with-
out storms have burst their banks. What do you think becomes of
the Rhone, what do you think becomes of the Rhine and Danube?
Their current is violent even within their own channels: what hap-
pens when they have spilled over and made themselves new banks,
and have cut through the soil and abandoned their riverbeds?
(9) With what violent momentum they surge onward, when the
Rhine, flowing over the plains, has not been weakened even by this
expansion, but has propelled its wide-spreading waters as if it were
going through a narrow channel; when the Danube is no longer
skirting the foot of the mountains or half way up them, but is attack-
ing the ridges themselves, carrying along sodden mountainsides, and
shattered cliffs, and promontories that occupy large regions and have
separated from the mainland as their foundations were sapped. Then,
finding no way out (for it has shut off all the exits itself ), it wheels
round and sweeps away an enormous stretch of land and cities in a
single maelstrom. (10) Meanwhile, the rains persist, the sky becomes
more threatening; it continually piles woe on woe. What had once
been cloudy weather is night, a night made dreadful and frightening
by the sporadic appearance of a terrible light; for lightning-bolts
flash frequently, and gales lash the sea, now for the first time swollen
by the arrival of the rivers, and too small for itself. Now it pushes
the shoreline forward and is not confined within its boundaries. But
torrents stop it from expanding and drive the surge back. However,
most of them are halted, as it were, by a grudging river-mouth; they
flood, and turn the farmlands into a single lake.
(11) Now everything, as far as the eye can see, is covered in water.
Every hill is hidden beneath the sea, and everywhere the depth is
enormous. Only on the highest mountain ridges are there shallows.
People have fled to the tallest peaks with their children and wives,
driving their flocks before them. Communication and travel is cut off
between these wretched people, for all the lower-lying land is filled
with water. (12) The remnants of the human race were clinging to allThe rivers break out and race across the open plains,
and all at once seize crops and trees, animals and men,
buildings, and sanctuaries, along with their temples.
If a house remains standing, yet a bigger wave covers its
roof-top;
and towers are about to collapse, overwhelmed, beneath the
billows.57
This is splendid, if he were not concerned with what the sheep and
wolves are doing. Is swimming possible in that deluge and that dev-
astation? Has not every beast been drowned by the same force that
has swept it away? (15) You have imagined the scene on the scale you
needed to when the whole earth was submerged, and the sky itself
crashed down to earth. Keep it up: you will know what is appropriate
if you reflect that the earth is swimming.
(28.1) Now let us return to our subject. There are some who think
that excessive rain can damage the earth but not submerge it. It takes
great force to shatter great things: rain will ruin cornfields, hail will
dislodge fruit, rivers will be swollen by rain, but they will subside.
(2) Some people think that the sea shifts and that they can find the
cause of such a catastrophe there; but the damage done by flash floods,
or rain, or rivers cannot produce such a huge shipwreck. When that
destruction is imminent, when the decision has been taken to renew
the human race, I would agree that there are constant downpours,
47
on terr estr i a l water s
the highest points. In their extremity their only source of comfort
was that fear had turned to bewilderment. In their dumbstruck state
they had no time to be afraid; there was not even any opportunity for
grief, since it loses its hold over someone who is too wretched to be
aware of suffering. (13) So “the mountains” stick out like islands “and
add to the number of the scattered Cyclades,”54 as that most inven-
tive of poets says, in splendid fashion, just as it suits the grandeur of
the subject when he writes, “Everything was sea, and the sea had no
shores,”55 if only he had not reduced the momentum of his inven-
tiveness and subject-matter to childish silliness with “A wolf swims
among sheep, and the waves support tawny lions.”56 (14) Frivolity
when the earth is swallowed up shows a lack of serious-mindedness.
His writing has shown greatness, and he has captured a vision of all
the turmoil when he writes,and the rain shows no let-up; with the north winds and drier breezes
held in check, and the south winds <spurred on>, clouds and rivers
overflow. But so far all that has been achieved is damage:
book three
48
Cornfields are flattened and the farmers lament
the ruin of their prayers; the long year’s fruitless labor is
wasted.58
(3) The earth does not need to be injured, but to be swallowed up.
So, after that opening gambit, the seas rise, but higher than usual,
pushing their waves beyond the furthest point reached by the most
violent storm. Then, as the winds press from behind, the seas propel
forward an immense surge that breaks far out of sight of the original
shore. When the shoreline has been pushed forward two or three
times, and the sea is established on foreign territory, then, as though
a barrier has been removed, a tide races forward from the remotest
depths of the sea to join battle. (4) For like the air, like the aether,59
this element has abundant supplies, and those that are unseen are
much the more plentiful. They are set in motion by fate, not by the
tide (for the tide is a servant of fate), and they make the sea swell up
in a huge wave and drive it forward. It rises to an amazing height and
towers above the safe refuges of humankind. That is not difficult for
water, since it reaches the same height as the land. (5) If the highest
points are surveyed, the seas are level with the land. For the earth is
level in all directions; its sunken and flat parts are only slightly lower
than the elevated ones. It approximates to the curved surface of a
sphere. The seas also form part of this, and they combine to create
the regular shape of the one globe. But just as someone looking at
a plain is deceived by the gentle slope, so we do not recognize the
curvature of the sea, and everything that is visible seems to be flat.
But the sea is at the same height as the land, and so it does not take
a vast amount to raise its level so that it overflows: a slight increase is
enough for it to cover something that is level with it; and it does not
flow from the shore, where it is lower, but from mid-ocean, where
that bulge is.
(6) So just as, when the moon and sun are in conjunction, the
equinoctial tide rises higher than all others, so this tide which is un-
leashed to occupy the land is more violent than the normal highest
tides, brings more water with it, and it does not recede until it has49
on terr estr i a l water s
risen above the summits of the mountains it is going to inundate.
In some places tides come a hundred miles inland without causing
damage, and they maintain the natural order, for they rise to the
appropriate level and then recede. (7) But on that occasion the tide
is not bound by laws, and its advance is unlimited. “How?” you ask.
In the same way as the conflagration will occur.60 Both events occur
when god has decided to inaugurate a better world and to end the
old. Water and fire lord it over terrestrial things; they bring about
creation, they bring about destruction. So whenever the world has
decided on revolution, the sea is sent crashing down over us, just as
heat and fire are when another form of extinction is approved.
(29.1) Some people think that the earth is shaken too, and, as the
ground splits apart, it exposes new sources of rivers, which gush out
more plentifully since they come from full reservoirs.
Berosos, who translated Belus,61 says that the movement of the
stars is the cause of all this. He is so confident in his assertion that he
gives a date for both the conflagration and the flood. He maintains
that the earth will burn whenever all the stars that now have different
courses62 converge in Cancer and are positioned beneath the same
point, so that a vertical line can pass through all their spheres; a flood
will occur when the same group of stars converges in Capricorn.
The summer solstice occurs in the former constellation, the winter
solstice in the latter; these are very powerful zodiac signs, since they
are the most important turning points in the annual cycle.
(2) I would accept these causes too (for such a great catastrophe
does not have a single origin), and the cause that our people63 as-
sign to the conflagration should apply here too, I think: whether the
world is an animal, or a body, such as trees and plants, governed by
nature, from its beginning to its end all that it must do, all that it
must undergo, is contained within it. (3) The entire rationality of a
future human being is incorporated within its seed, and, while still
unborn, the baby contains the law governing the beard and grey hair
(for the features of the entire body and of its subsequent growth are
there, in miniature, and invisible); and in just the same way the origin
of the world encapsulated not just the sun, and the moon, and the
motions of the heavenly bodies, and the birth of animals, but equally
the forces that would transform the earth. These include the flood,
which occurs, just like winter or summer, according to the laws ofbook three
50
the world. (4) So it will not be produced by rain, but by rain as well;
not by an invasion of the sea, but by an invasion of the sea as well;
not by an earthquake, but by an earthquake as well; not by shaking
<the world, but by shaking the world as well>. Everything will assist
nature so that nature’s decrees may be implemented. But the earth
itself will supply the chief cause of its own inundation, for we have
said that it can change and dissolve into liquid.64
(5) So whenever the end of human history arrives, when the
earth’s parts have to perish and all be utterly destroyed, in order that
primitive, innocent people may be created afresh and no teacher of
worse behavior may survive, then more liquid will be produced than
there has ever been before. For at present the elements are weighed
out as required. One of them needs to be increased so that an imbal-
ance may upset the current equilibrium. Water will be increased: for
now there is enough to encircle the land, not to cover it; whatever you
add to it must overflow into alien territory. (6) So consider whether
earth does not also need to be diminished, so that the weaker may
succumb to the stronger. So it will begin to decay, then to decompose
and turn to liquid, and to dissolve into a steady stream of putrefac-
tion. Then rivers will spring up beneath mountains and make them
crumble under the onslaught. (7) Then fields that are affected will
become sodden; all the ground will exude water; the mountaintops
will bubble over. Just as healthy parts become diseased, and an ulcer
spreads to adjacent areas, so the regions closest to land that is already
awash will themselves dissolve and form a trickle, then a fast current;
then, as rocks gape apart all over the place, they will rush through
the channels and join up all the seas. The Adriatic will be no more,
nor the straits of the Sicilian sea, nor Charybdis, nor Scylla.65 The
new sea will overwhelm all those myths, and the ocean that now
encircles the land, assigned to its outer edges, will reach the center.
(8) What happens next? Winter will cling on to the months that do
not belong to it, summer will be kept out, and all the heavenly bodies
that dry up the earth will fade away, with their heat suppressed. So
many famous names will disappear, the Caspian and Red seas, the
Ambracian and Cretan gulfs, the Propontis and the Black Sea, when
that deluge spreads a single sea over everything. All distinctions will
disappear; everything that has its own place assigned by nature will
be mixed together. No one will be protected by city walls or by tow-51
on terr estr i a l water s
ers. Temples will be no use to worshippers, nor the highest points
of cities, for the waves will overtake them as they flee and pull them
down even from the citadels. (9) Waters will converge from the west
and from the east. A single day will bury the human race. All that
fortune’s indulgence has fostered for so long, all it has elevated above
the rest, the noble and the honored alike, and the kingdoms of great
nations, all will be sent to the bottom.
(30.1) Everything is easy for nature, as I have said,66 especially
what she has determined to do from the start and tackles not un-
expectedly but with due warning. Already from the first day of the
world, when it separated out from formless unity into its present
structure, the date when the earth would be drowned was decreed;
and so that in the future the effort should not be difficult, as with an
unfamiliar task, the seas have long been practicing for it. (2) Do you
not see how the waves attack the shore as though they were going to
break out? Do you not see how the tide crosses its boundaries and
leads the sea forward to possess the land? Do you not see how it is
perpetually battling against its confinement? And what is more, do
you only need to be afraid where you can see turmoil—in the sea, and
in rivers that burst out with a great quantity of breath? (3) Has nature
not put water everywhere, so that she could attack us from all sides
when she wanted? If people who dig up the ground do not encoun-
ter moisture, and if, whenever either greed sends us underground or
some other motive compels us to penetrate deeper, the digging is
not halted by water, then I am a liar. Add that there are enormous
hidden lakes, a great expanse of buried sea, a great many rivers flow-
ing unseen. (4) So the causes of the deluge will come from all sides,
since some waters flow under the earth, others flow round it; they
have long been restrained, but they will be victorious, and will merge
rivers with rivers, lakes with swamps. Then the sea will fill the mouths
of all the springs, and enlarge them with wider openings. Just as our
stomach drains the body through diarrhea, just as our energy turns
into sweat, so the earth will be liquefied, and, even when other causes
come to a halt, it will find within itself the resources to be drowned.
But I should prefer to believe that every cause will combine.
(5) Destruction will not be long delayed: harmony is being tested
and disrupted. As soon as the world lapses slightly from its current
requisite level of watchfulness, instantly water will burst in frombook three
52
all sides, from visible and hidden sources, from above, from below.
(6) Nothing is so violent, so lacking in self-control, so defiant and
hostile to its constraints, as a great mass of water. It will exploit the
freedom it is granted, and, under nature’s orders, it will fill all it de-
stroys and envelops. As fire that breaks out in different places soon
combines in an inferno as the flames race to join together, so in a
moment the seas that well up in different places will join forces.
(7) The waves will not enjoy this license for ever. Once the de-
struction of the human race is complete, along with the elimination
of the wild animals whose characters human beings had acquired,
then once again the earth will absorb the water, once again it will
force the sea to stay put and rage within its boundaries. The ocean
will be thrown out of our territory and driven into its hiding places,
and the old order will be restored. (8) Every kind of animal will be
created again, and earth will acquire human beings who are unac-
quainted with wickedness and born under better auspices. But even
their innocence will not last except while they are newly formed.
Wickedness soon creeps in. Virtue is difficult to discover; it needs a
guide and leader; vice is learned even without a teacher.