Book 6 [originally Book 5 ]
On Earthquakes
(1.1) We have heard, Lucilius, excellent man, that Pompeii, the busy
Campanian city, has been ruined by an earthquake, and all the neigh-
boring areas have been badly affected. The coasts of Surrentum and
Stabiae on the one side, and of Herculaneum on the other, meet
at the city, encircling the open sea, which there retreats inland in
a charming bay. This event happened during winter too, a period
that our ancestors used to promise us was free from such dangers.
(2) Campania had always been nervous of this threat, but had re-
mained unharmed and had many times got over its fears; but this
earthquake, occurring on February 5 [in the consulship of Regulus
and Verginius],1 devastated all of the region and caused great de-
struction. For part of the town of Herculaneum collapsed too, and
even what remains is standing precariously. The colony of Nuceria,
though spared catastrophe, is not spared complaints. Naples, too, has
lost many private buildings, though no civic ones, being only lightly
affected by the vast tragedy. Country houses have collapsed or have
often been shaken without damage. (3) In addition to this, a flock of
hundreds of sheep was killed, and statues were split apart; afterward
some people wandered around in a state of shock and deranged.2
Both the plan of the work I have embarked upon and the coin-
cidence of this recent disaster call for a discussion of the causes of
earthquakes. (4) Comfort needs to be found for the fearful, and their
great terror needs to be eradicated. For what can anyone regard as
sufficiently secure, if the world itself is shaken, and its firmest parts
crumble; if the one thing in it that is immovable and fixed, so that it
supports everything that converges on it, starts to waver; if the earth
has lost its characteristic property of standing still? Wherever will
our fears find rest? What shelter will our bodies find, where will they
escape to in their anxiety, if the fear arises from the foundations and
is drawn from the depths? (5) There is general panic when buildings
rumble and their collapse is signaled.3 Then everyone rushes straight
outside, abandons his home, and entrusts himself to the open air.
What hiding place can we see, what help, if the earth itself cracks,
87book six
88
and the very thing that protects and supports us, that cities are built
on, that some have called the foundation of the world, gapes open
and trembles? (6) I do not say what help, but what comfort can you
find, when fear has lost every means of escape? What, I say, is suf-
ficiently fortified, what is firm enough to protect anything else or
even itself ? I shall drive an enemy back from the wall, and high, sheer
fortresses will delay even large armies with the difficulty of approach-
ing them; a harbor rescues us from a storm; roofs keep out torrential
downpours and rain that falls incessantly; fire does not pursue those
who run from it; underground houses and deeply dug caves are pro-
tection against thunder and threats from heaven (that heavenly fire
does not penetrate the earth, but is quenched by a thin covering of
it);4 in a plague one can move home. No disaster is without an escape.
(7) Lightning-bolts have never burnt up whole peoples; a plague-
ridden atmosphere has emptied cities but has not destroyed them.
But this disaster spreads far and wide, inescapable, greedy, harmful
on a national scale. For it does not swallow up just individual homes
or households or cities: it overwhelms entire peoples and regions,
sometimes covering them in ruins, sometimes burying them in deep
chasms. It does not even leave evidence to show that what exists
no more did once exist, but the soil spreads over the noblest cities
without any trace of their former state.
(8) There is no shortage of people who are more afraid of this
manner of death, in which they fall into the abyss with their homes
and are carried off alive from the ranks of the living; as though not
every kind of death reached the same destination. This is one out-
standing feature of the justice of nature, that when it comes to death,
we are all on equal terms. (9) So it makes no difference whether a sin-
gle stone crushes me, or I am buried by an entire mountain; whether
the weight of a single house falls on me, and I perish beneath its
paltry rubble and dust, or the entire earth blots out my life; whether
I breathe my last in the daylight and in the open or in a huge rift in
the gaping earth; whether I am carried to those depths alone or with
a great company of peoples falling with me. It makes no difference
to me how great a commotion surrounds my death; death amounts
to the same thing everywhere.
(10) So let us face this disaster bravely—it can be neither avoided
nor foreseen—and let us stop listening to those who have given up89
On Earthquakes
on Campania and have emigrated following this catastrophe, who
say they will never come near the region again. For who prom-
ises them that this or that bit of land rests on better foundations?
(11) Everywhere shares the same condition, and, if not yet shaken by
an earthquake, still it can be shaken. Perhaps this spot on which you
are standing too confidently will be torn apart tonight, or today be-
fore nightfall. How are you to know that the places in which fortune
has already used up her power, those that from now on are supported
on their own ruins, are not in a better state? (12) We are wrong if
we believe that any part of the earth is exempt and immune from
this danger: everywhere lies under the same law; nature has created
nothing to be immovable. Different parts collapse at different times,
and just as, in large cities, at one moment this house is verging on
collapse, at the next moment that one, so, in the earth, at one moment
this part is damaged, at the next moment that one. (13) Tyre was once
notorious for earthquake destruction; Asia lost twelve cities simulta-
neously; last year this disastrous force, whatever it is, attacked Achaea
and Macedonia; now it has damaged Campania. Fate goes round in
circles, and if it has missed something out for a while, it goes back
to it. It harasses some places more rarely, some more often. It allows
nothing to be immune and unharmed. (14) Not only we humans,
who are born short-lived, frail creatures, but cities, and the coasts and
shores of the land, and even the sea, are enslaved to fate. And yet we
promise ourselves that all the blessings of fortune will last, and we
believe that someone will find that happiness, which of all human
possessions is the most fleeting and fickle, has substance and perma-
nence. (15) When people promise themselves that everything will last
for ever, it never occurs to them that the very thing we stand on is not
durable. For it is a defect not of Campania or Achaea, but of every
piece of ground, that it holds together only loosely; it is weakened by
many causes, and while the whole endures, parts collapse.
(2.1) What am I doing? I had promised comfort in the face of
dangers that are infrequent, and now look, I am warning that ev-
erywhere there are things to be feared. I say there is no such thing
as endless peace: what can decay can also destroy. But I regard this
fact itself as a comfort, and a very powerful one, since incurable fear
<rescues> the foolish. Reason can dispel terror from the wise, but in
the ignorant, desperation leads to a great sense of calm. (2) So regardbook six
90
the following words, which were spoken to those people stunned by
their sudden captivity, amid fire and enemies, as spoken to the hu-
man race: “The only rescue for the defeated is to expect no rescue.”5
(3) If you want to be afraid of nothing, regard everything as some-
thing to be afraid of. Look around and see what trivial things can
destroy us: not even food, not liquid, not waking, not sleeping, is
beneficial except in moderation. Now you will realize that we are
mere bodies, insignificant and frail, fleeting, destined to be destroyed
with no great exertion. Without doubt this is the only danger we face,
that the earth quakes, that it is suddenly shattered and drags down
the things on its surface! (4) The person terrified of lightning-bolts,
earthquakes, and subsidence is very self-important! He should be
aware of his own frailty and be afraid of phlegm!6 But of course we
are born like this, assigned such successful bodies! We have grown
to such a stature! So are we incapable of dying unless whole sections
of the world are shaken, unless the heavens thunder, unless the earth
collapses? (5) Pain in a fingernail, and not even in all of it, but a cut
at the side of it, can finish us off ! Should I be afraid of earth tremors
when thickened saliva can suffocate me? Should I panic at the sea
emerging from its sea-bed, at the prospect of the tide rushing in
further, bringing more water than usual and overwhelming me, when
some people have been choked by a drink that went down the wrong
way? How foolish to tremble at the sea when you know you could be
killed by a drop of water!
(6) There is no greater comfort in the face of death than mortality
itself, none in the face of all those external terrors greater than the fact
there are countless dangers here inside us. For what is crazier than
fainting at the sound of thunder and crawling below the earth from
fear of lightning-flashes? What is more foolish than being afraid of
<the earth’s> swaying or of the sudden collapse of mountainsides and
invasions of the sea as it races beyond the shoreline, when death is
present everywhere and can attack from anywhere, and nothing is too
tiny to be able to bring destruction to humankind? (7) Those things
should not upset us, as though they contain more suffering than an
ordinary death, far from it; rather, since we have to depart this life
and to breathe our last at some time or other, we should be glad if our
death has a grander cause. We have to die somewhere, sooner or later:
even if this soil stands firm, remains within its confines, and is not91
On Earthquakes
shaken by any harmful force, sooner or later it will cover me. <What>
difference does it make whether I spread it over me or it does so
itself ? (8) Suppose it is split and shattered by the immense force of I
know not what evil, and it drags me down to an immeasurable depth:
what of it? Is death easier on the level? What grounds for complaint
have I if nature does not want me to succumb to an ignoble demise,
if she buries me beneath part of herself ? (9) My friend Vagellius says
in splendid fashion, in that famous poem of his, “If I have to fall, I
should like to fall from heaven.”7 In the same way one can say, “If
I have to fall, may I fall while the earth is shaken,” not because it is
right to wish for a public disaster, but because it is a great comfort in
the face of death to see that the earth too is mortal.
(3.1) It will also help to realize in advance that the gods are not re-
sponsible for any of this, and neither the sky nor the earth is shaken by
the anger of divinities:8 these things have their own causes, and do not
run wild to order, but, like our bodies, they are upset by certain defects,
and when they seem to be causing harm, they are suffering it. (2) When
we are ignorant of the truth, everything is more terrifying, especially
when rarity increases the fear. Familiar things affect us less severely,
but alarm caused by something unusual is more intense. Yet why do
we find anything unusual? Because we grasp nature with our eyes, not
our reason, and we do not consider what she can do but what she has
done. So we are punished for this carelessness when terrified as if by
something new, although it is not new but unusual. (3) But, you say,
does it not fill minds with religious awe across the whole community
if the sun is seen to suffer an eclipse, or if the moon, which is more
frequently dimmed, disappears either partially or wholly? This is far
truer in the case of torches driven across the sky, a large section of sky
blazing, long-haired stars, multiple suns, heavenly bodies appearing
by day, and fires suddenly darting across the sky, leaving bright trails
of light behind them.9 (4) We never marvel at these things without
fear. Since the cause of the fear is ignorance, is it not worth acquiring
knowledge in order to remove your fear? How much more worth-
while it is to investigate causes, with your whole mind focused on this
goal! For no more deserving subject can be found, and you must not
simply lend your mind to it, but spend your mind on it.
(4.1) So let us investigate what it is that moves the earth deep
below the surface, what disturbs such a heavy mass, and what is morebook six
92
powerful than it, so that it shatters that great weight with its force;
why the earth sometimes shakes, sometimes crumbles and subsides,
at other times splits apart and gapes open, sometimes preserving for
a long time the opening caused by its collapse, at other times swiftly
closing it up again; why it sometimes diverts into itself rivers known
for their great size, sometimes sends out new ones, at times opens
up veins of hot water, at times makes them grow cold; and why it
occasionally emits fire through some previously unknown fissure in
a mountain or rock, at times extinguishes other fires that have been
well-known and renowned for centuries. It produces thousands of
marvels: it alters the shape of the terrain, it brings down mountains,
lifts up plains, makes valleys swell up, and raises new islands in the
deep. The causes of these phenomena deserve examination.
(2) “What will be the benefit?” you ask. The greatest possible ben-
efit, the knowledge of nature. The investigation of this subject has
many benefits, but none is finer than the fact that it captivates people
with its own magnificence, and their motives for studying it are not
gain but wonder. So let us examine the causes of these phenomena.
I find this inquiry so enjoyable that, though I once wrote a book on
earthquakes in my youth, I still wanted to test myself and explore
whether age has added anything to my knowledge, or at least to my
thoroughness.
(5.1) Some have thought that the cause of earthquakes is to be
found in water, others in fire, others in the earth itself, others in
breath, others in more than one of these, others in all of them. Some
people have said that it is clear that one of these is the cause, but
it is not clear which one. (2) I shall now examine these theories
individually, but first of all I need to say that early views were rather
imprecise and crude: people were still roaming in search of the truth;
everything was new to the first investigators. Later those same views
were refined, and if any progress was made, it should nevertheless be
credited to them. It took great courage to prize open nature’s hiding
places, and, not content with her outward appearance, to look inside,
and to immerse oneself in the secrets of the gods. Anyone who was
optimistic that discovery was possible made a major contribution to
the search. (3) So we should listen to the early writers indulgently.
Nothing is completed while it is beginning; not just on this subject,
the most important and most obscure of all (on which, even when93
On Earthquakes
much has been achieved, still every generation will find something
to contribute), but in every other pursuit, the starting point is always
far from the culmination.
(6.1) That water is the cause has been said by more than one
person, and in more than one way. Thales of Miletus10 thinks that
the whole earth rides and floats on the liquid beneath it, whether
you call this ocean, or the great sea, or water of a different sort, still
in its primeval form, the liquid element. “The earth is supported by
this sea,” he says, “like some large ship weighing heavily on the water
it presses down on.” (2) It is unnecessary to give the reasons why he
thinks that the heaviest part of the world cannot be buoyed up by
breath, which is so tenuous and fleeting; for the present discussion
is not about the position of the earth but about its movement. He
presents the following argument to show that water is responsible for
the earth shaking: in virtually every sizeable earthquake new springs
emerge; similarly in ships one finds that, if they lean over and tilt to
one side, water seeps in, and if they are unduly weighed down by an
excessive load of cargo, the water either washes over the ship, or at
any rate comes up higher than usual on the port and starboard sides.
(3) It does not take long to show that this view is false: for if the earth
were supported on water and were sometimes shaken by it, it would
always be moving, and we should not be surprised at its quaking but
at its standing still. In addition, it would all be shaken, not just part
of it (for one never finds half a ship being tossed by the waves); yet
in fact earthquakes affect not the entire earth but part of it. So how
could something, all of which is floating, not all be shaken, if it is
shaken by the thing on which it is floating? (4) “But why do springs
emerge?” In the first place, the earth has often trembled without
any new water flowing out; next, if this were the cause of the water
breaking out, it would pour over the edges of the earth (just as we
see happen with rivers and the sea: when ships are sinking lower, the
higher water level is most apparent at the sides); finally, the water
would not emerge in such tiny quantities as you say, and would not
seep through like bilge water through a crack, but there would be a
huge inundation, seeing that it comes from an endless supply that
supports everything.
(7.1) Some people have attributed earthquakes to water, but not by
the same process. “Many types of water flow over the whole earth,”book six
94
one of them says. “In some places there are perpetual rivers, large
enough to be navigable even without the assistance of rainfall: here
the Nile carries huge volumes of water throughout the summer, here
the Danube and the Rhine do the same, flowing in between paci-
fied and hostile territory, the first restraining the attacks of the Sar-
matians and forming the boundary between Europe and Asia,11 the
second repelling the Germans, a race keen on war. (2) Think also of
very extensive lakes, of expanses of water surrounded by peoples un-
known to each other, of unnavigable swamps through which even the
inhabitants cannot communicate with each other; then think of all
the springs, of all the river sources that unexpectedly disgorge great
currents from their hiding places, then of all those rushing torrents
that are formed temporarily, whose force is as brief as it is sudden.
(3) Every type and form of water is also found within the earth: there
too some waters are carried along in a vast current, and swirl over
waterfalls; others are feebler: they spread out in shallows, and they
flow gently and peacefully. Who would deny that those waters are
collected in huge receptacles and in many places lie still and motion-
less? It does not take long to argue that there is a lot of water in the
place from which all water comes: for the earth would not be capable
of discharging so many rivers if it did not disgorge them from some
reservoir, and a large one. (4) If this is true, it is inevitable that some-
times a river will flood within the earth, burst its banks, and violently
attack anything in its way. Thus an earthquake will occur somewhere
where this river has directed its onslaught and has battered away until
it abated. It may happen that, as a stream flows past some region, it
causes erosion, leading to the collapse of a great mass of rock, and
the landslide makes things on the surface shake.
(5) “Also,12 if people do not believe that the gulfs of a huge sea are
hidden within the earth, they are relying too much on their eyesight,
and do not know how to let their minds advance beyond it. For I see
no hindrance or obstacle to the earth having a shore hidden within it
as well, and a sea that flows in through concealed channels, one that
occupies just as great an area down there, or perhaps an even larger
one, since the earth’s surface had to be shared with all those living
creatures: what is out of sight and devoid of any occupants is more
freely available to the waters. (6) What is to prevent them forming
waves down there too and being whipped up by winds, which any95
On Earthquakes
gap in the earth and any air can produce? So an unusually violent
storm can develop, crash against some part of the earth, and cause
it to shake violently. For in our world too many things that were far
away from the sea have been battered by a sudden tidal wave, and
breakers that were heard in the distance have inundated villas built
with a sea view. Down there as well the subterranean sea can recede
and then can cause an inundation; neither of which happens without
an earthquake overhead.”
(8.1) I do not think you will hesitate for long about whether to
believe that there are subterranean rivers and a concealed sea. From
where do these things emerge, from where do they come into our
world, if the source of the liquid is not contained within the earth?
(2) Consider: when you see the Tigris interrupted and dried up in
mid-course—not diverted all at once, but gradually, first contracting
with no perceptible loss, then disappearing—where do you think it
goes, if not to unseen parts of the earth, especially when you see it
emerging again no smaller than when it was flowing earlier? What
about when you see the Alpheus, celebrated by the poets, disap-
pearing below ground in Achaea, and then, after crossing the sea,
once more issuing in Sicily as a most attractive spring [Arethusa]? 13
(3) Are you unaware that among the various theories explaining how
the summer flooding of the Nile occurs there is this one: that the
river gushes out of the earth and rises with water not from above
but from deep within? I heard two centurions whom Nero Caesar,
great lover of the other virtues and especially of truth, had sent to
search for the source of the Nile. They told how they made a long
journey, when they were provided with assistance by the king of
Ethiopia, were given recommendations to the neighboring kings, and
penetrated further inland. (4) “Then,” they said, “we reached inter-
minable marshlands. The local people had not discovered where they
ended, nor can anyone hope to do so: weeds are so entangled with
the water and the water <with weeds>, they are impassable either
on foot or by boat; only a small, one-man craft can manage on the
muddy, overgrown swamp. There,” he said, “we saw two crags from
which a huge volume of river water cascaded down.” (5) Whether
that is the source of the Nile or a tributary, whether it first emerges
there or returns to the surface after being swallowed underground
in its earlier course, do you not believe that this water, whatever it is,book six
96
rises from a great lake within the earth? For the earth must contain
liquid, both dispersed in many places and concentrated in a single
place, to be able to disgorge it with such force.
(9.1) Some people—and they are not <negligible authorities>—
think that fire is the cause of earthquakes. In particular Anaxagoras
thinks that both the air and the earth are shaken by very similar
causes:14 down below, dense air that is concentrated into clouds is
broken up by breath, with the same force with which clouds com-
monly burst in our world. Fire breaks out from this collision between
clouds and from the rapid movement of the ejected air, and this fire
attacks everything in its way, looking for an exit. It shatters anything
that resists, until it either finds a way out to the sky through some
narrow channel, or violently forces its way out. (2) Other people
think that fire is the cause, but not for the same reason, but because it
burns deep inside the earth in many places and consumes everything
in the vicinity.15 Whenever the eroded material collapses, an earth-
quake results in the region, for it is robbed of its underlying supports,
and it shakes until it caves in, since there is nothing there to take the
weight. Then chasms and huge abysses open up. Alternatively, after
long hesitation, the region settles down on top of what still remains
standing. (3) We can see this happening in our own experience too
when part of a city is affected by fire. When joists are burnt through,
or what was supporting the upper stories is damaged, then the house-
tops sway for a while before collapsing; they continue to fall and
remain unstable until they have come to rest on something solid.
(10.1) Anaximenes says that the earth itself causes its own
quakes,16 and nothing attacks from outside to cause the movement,
but the cause is within itself and from itself. For some sections of
the earth collapse when either dissolved by water, or eaten away by
fire, or shattered by violent breath. But even when these forces cease,
there remain factors that cause collapse or fracture. In the first place,
everything is weakened by the passage of time, and nothing is secure
against old age; it gnaws away at solid and extremely strong things
too. (2) So just as in old buildings things collapse even without be-
ing shaken, since their weight exceeds their strength, so in the entire
body of the earth it can happen that parts of it are weakened by
old age, and when weakened they collapse and cause tremors on
the surface. In the first place, they do so while they are breaking off97
On Earthquakes
(for nothing of any size splits off without causing movement in the
thing it was attached to); then, after they have fallen off, when they
meet something solid, they rebound like a ball, which, when it falls,
leaps back up, and bounces repeatedly, each time being propelled
from the ground in a fresh trajectory; and if they fall into standing
water, their fall shakes the neighboring region with the wave sent out
by the sudden, massive impact of the weight crashing down from
high above.
(11) Some people attribute the shaking to fire, but in a different
way. Since fires are burning in many places, inevitably they give off an
immense amount of hot vapor, which has no escape. It increases the
tension of the breath with its energy, and, if it attacks more fiercely, it
splits apart anything in its way; if it is gentler, it merely shakes it. We
see water bubbling away when there is a fire below it. What fire does
in the case of this small amount of enclosed water, we should suppose
it does to a much greater degree when it is violent and widespread
and gets huge quantities of water boiling; anything that it pushes
against with the steam from this turbulent water is shaken.
(12.1) Many very distinguished writers think it is breath that
causes earthquakes. Archelaus,17 a careful investigator, says, “Winds
sweep down into the cavities in the earth; then, when all the spaces
are full, and the air has condensed as much as it could, any breath
that comes along later pushes and crushes the air already there, and
with repeated gusts it first compresses it, then catapults it forward;
(2) as it searches for somewhere to go, it makes all the narrow chan-
nels wider and tries to break out of its prison. The result is that, as
the breath wrestles and looks for an escape route, the earth quakes.
Therefore when an earthquake is about to happen, immediately be-
forehand the atmosphere is tranquil and calm, the reason being that
the powerful breath that normally provokes the winds is detained
beneath the earth.” Recently, too, when the earthquake occurred in
Campania, in the days that preceded, the atmosphere was quite still,
although it was wintertime, when the weather is unsettled. (3) “So,
has an earthquake never occurred when a wind was blowing?” Very
rarely: <for rarely> have there been two winds blowing at once; but
it can and does occur. If we accept this, and we agree that two winds
can operate at once, why can it not happen that one wind sets in mo-
tion the air above ground, the other wind the air below?book six
98
(13.1) You can count Aristotle as an adherent of this view, and his
student Theophrastus (not, as the Greeks think, a man whose style is
divine—but it is attractive and effortlessly elegant).18 I shall expound
the view they share: “There is always some exhalation from the earth,
sometimes dry, sometimes mixed with moisture. This issues from
deep inside and rises as far as it is able; then when it has nowhere
further to advance, it reverses direction and turns back on itself. Then
the conflict, as the breath moves back and forth, flings obstacles aside,
and whether the breath is cut off, or it forces a way through narrow
channels, it provokes movement and disturbance.”
(2) Strato,19 who belongs to the same school, specialized in this
branch of philosophy and researched into natural science. His verdict
is as follows: “Cold and hot always move away from each other; they
cannot coexist. Cold flows into the places that hotness has left, and
conversely heat is found where cold has been expelled. The truth of
what I say, that these two things are driven in opposite directions,
should be clear to you from the following: (3) in winter, when there
is cold above the earth’s surface, wells are hot, and so are caves and all
kinds of hollows beneath the earth, because the heat retreats there,
giving way to the cold that is in control up above. When it reaches the
regions below and crams itself in as far as it is able, the denser it is, the
stronger it is. But this hot air encounters <cold air that has previously
gathered beneath the earth>; the cold air that has collected and been
squeezed into a corner necessarily gives way to the hot. (4) The reverse
happens as well: when a large amount of cold enters the caverns, any
hot lurking there gives way to the cold and escapes to some confined
space, driven with great force, because the natures of the two things
do not allow harmony or coexistence. So, as it flees, desperate to get
out at all costs, it demolishes and hurls aside everything in the vicinity.
(5) Therefore before an earthquake a bellowing sound is commonly
heard, as the winds fight unseen.” (In the words of our Virgil,20 in no
other way could “the ground bellow underfoot and the high moun-
tains be shaken,” if this were not the work of the winds.) (6) “Then the
progress of this battle is always the same: the heat gathers its forces
and breaks out again; then the cold is subdued and collapses, though
it will soon regain the supremacy. As these forces advance in turn, and
the breath travels to and fro, the earth quakes.”99
On Earthquakes
(14.1) There are some who think that earthquakes are produced
by breath and nothing else, but by a different mechanism from the
one preferred by Aristotle. Listen to what they say. Our bodies are
irrigated both by blood and by breath, which passes along channels
of its own. We have some narrower receptacles for the soul, through
which it does no more than move, and some broader ones, in which
it collects and from which it is distributed to the various parts of the
body. In the same way the entire body of the whole earth is perme-
ated both by water, which functions like blood, and by wind, which
one could simply call soul. These two things are in motion at some
points and stand still at others. (2) When our bodies are in good
health, the pulse rate is undisturbed and remains regular, but when
there is a problem, the pulse is faster, and gasping and panting are
signs of strain and exhaustion. In just the same way the earth too
remains unshaken while in its natural condition, but when some-
thing goes wrong, then there is movement like that in a sick body:
the breath that was flowing more moderately vibrates more strongly
and shakes its veins. Nor, as those who think the earth is a living
creature were saying a short while ago, <***.>21 Unless this is so, just
like an animal, it will experience equal discomfort all over; for in us
fever does not strike some parts more moderately and <others more
violently>, but it pervades every part with equal intensity.
(3) Consider, then, whether breath enters the earth from the sur-
rounding air and flows without causing damage so long as it has a
way out. If it encounters and bumps into something that blocks its
path, then first it piles up as air pours in from behind, next it grudg-
ingly escapes through some crevice, moving more violently the more
it is constricted. This cannot occur without a fight, and a fight cannot
occur without movement. (4) If it does not even find a crevice to flow
out through, it accumulates and rages there, swirling this way and
that, knocking over some obstacles, bursting through others; for, be-
ing very fine and yet also very strong, it even breaks through barriers
put in its way, and also with its power it drives apart and shatters
whatever it enters. Then the earth quakes: for either it opens up to
make room for the wind, or, after it has made room, being robbed
of its foundations, it collapses into the very cavern through which it
let the wind escape.book six
100
(15) Some people think that the earth is perforated at many points.
It does not have only those original entrances that it acquired at its
creation, like breathing passages, but accidents have produced many
more. In some places water has caused the earth above to sink; tor-
rents have cut through other places; others have split and gaped open
in intense heat. Breath enters through these gaps. If the sea shuts it
in and drives it deeper down, and the waves do not permit it to get
out again, then the breath, with both exit and retreat cut off, swirls
around; and because it cannot go in a straight line, which is natural
for it, it struggles upward, and splits open the earth that is pressing
down on it.
(16.1) It still remains to give the view of the majority of writers,
the one that will perhaps get my vote. It is plain that the earth con-
tains breath: I do not mean just the breath that makes it cohere and
keep its parts united, which is found even in rocks and dead bodies,22
but I mean the life-giving breath that is vigorous and sustains ev-
erything. Unless it contained this, how could it instill breath into
all those trees and all those plants that have no other source of life?
How could it nourish all the different kinds of roots that go down
into it in different ways—some growing near the surface, others sent
deeper down—unless it contained a lot of soul to produce so many,
varied plants and make them grow as they breathe and feed on it?
(2) So far I have been using lightweight arguments. The entire
heaven, surrounded by the fiery aether, the highest part of the world,
all these stars, whose number cannot be reckoned, all this host of
heavenly bodies, and, to omit the others, the sun, which orbits so
close to us, several times larger than the entire circumference of the
earth—all these draw their nourishment from the earth and share it
among themselves, and are obviously sustained by nothing other than
the earth’s exhalation. This is their nourishment, this is their food.23
(3) Now, the earth could not nurture so many things so much larger
than itself if it were not full of soul, which it gives off from every part
of itself, day and night. It must be the case that it has plenty left over,
when so much is demanded and taken from it. To be sure, what is
emitted is created as required (for it would not have a constant supply
of breath sufficient for all those heavenly bodies unless the elements
moved in a cycle and were transformed into one another), but never-
theless the earth must be full and overflowing, and must bring breath101
On Earthquakes
out from its storehouse. (4) So there is no doubt that a lot of breath
is concealed within it, and a broad expanse of air occupies hidden
spaces beneath the earth. If this is true, then necessarily anything
that is full of a very mobile substance must often be moved. For can
anyone doubt that nothing is as restless as air, or as changeable, and
as delighted by upheaval?
(17.1) So it follows that it exploits its own nature, and, since it
wants to be constantly in motion, it sometimes moves other things
as well. This occurs when its passage is barred. For as long as it is
not hindered, its movement is calm; when it meets an obstacle and
is held up, it goes crazy and sweeps away the obstructions, just like
the “Araxes, angry at the bridge”:24 (2) as long as its channel is easy
and unimpeded, it lets its waters flow onward as they arrive; but
when rocks placed there by human hand or by chance check its pas-
sage, then it gains energy from the delay, and the more numerous
the obstacles, the more force it acquires. For all the water builds up
behind and rises in level, and, once it cannot support its own pres-
sure, it rushes forward, gaining strength, and escapes headlong, tak-
ing the obstructions with it. The same happens with breath, which,
the stronger and nimbler it is, breaks out all the more quickly and
violently demolishes every barrier. This causes an earthquake, in the
region, naturally, beneath which the battle has been fought. (3) The
truth of this account is demonstrated by the following evidence too:
often after an earthquake has occurred, if part of the earth’s surface
has been split open, a wind has blown from it for several days. That
is what is reported to have happened in the earthquake that affected
Chalcis. You will find in Asclepiodotus, a student of Posidonius [in
these very causes of natural questions],25 and you will find in other
writers, too, that the earth gaped open at one point, and a wind blew
from there for a considerable time. It had presumably made for itself
the channel through which it issued.
(18.1) So the principal cause of earthquakes is breath, which is
naturally swift-moving and constantly changing its position. As
long as it is not being pushed around and is lurking in an empty
space, it spreads out harmlessly and is no trouble to its surroundings.
(2) When some external cause interferes and goads it on, and drives
it into a smaller space, then, if it still can, it merely gets out of the
way and wanders off. When it is robbed of all opportunity of leavingbook six
102
and is obstructed on every side, then “with a loud rumbling from
the mountain it roars around its prison walls”;26 for a long while
it batters and tears and shakes them, with a ferocity matching the
strength of the obstacle it has been wrestling with. (3) Then, when it
has gone round examining every bit of its prison and has been unable
to get out, it rebounds from the place that it has dashed against with
the greatest force, and it either disperses through unseen passages,
as the earthquake itself makes the earth less dense, or it bursts out
through a fresh wound. That is right: such a mighty force cannot be
contained, nor can any structure restrain a wind. For it undoes any
fastening and carries every weight along with it; it pours through
the tiniest openings to make room for itself and sets itself free by
its invincible natural power, especially when it is agitated and is de-
fending its rights. (4) Breath is indeed an indomitable force: there
will be nothing to “restrain the wrestling winds and the deafening
storms with its command, and curb them with chains and prison.” 27
(5) Doubtless the poets wanted the place in which the winds were
confined and hidden below the earth to be thought of as a prison, but
they did not realize that what is confined is not yet a wind, nor that
what is a wind cannot any longer be confined. For what is confined
is at rest; it is stationary air: wind is always on the run.
(6) To these arguments one can add another to show that earth-
quakes are produced by breath. Our own bodies as well tremble only
if some factor upsets the breath in them: when it contracts with
fear, when it grows weak with old age and becomes feeble in slug-
gish veins, or when it is subdued by cold or diverted from its usual
course by the onset of a fever. (7) As long as it is flowing unimpaired
and moving as normal, there is no trembling in the body. But when
something arises that restricts its normal functioning, then it is not
strong enough to tolerate what it had been able to endure while it
was healthy; it grows weak, and causes shaking in parts of the body
that, when it itself was strong, it kept firm.
(19.1) Let us listen, since we must, to Metrodorus of Chius as he
takes his turn to say what he thinks.28 For I do not allow myself to
omit even views that I disagree with, since it is preferable to grant all
of them access and to condemn what we disagree with rather than to
omit it. (2) So what does he say? “When someone sings into a large
jar, his voice races round with a kind of vibration, and it reverberates;103
On Earthquakes
though its initial movement is so slight, all the same the voice spreads
all round, making contact with its container and creating a noise in
it. In just the same way, the vast expanses of the caverns suspended
beneath the earth contain their own air, which is disturbed as soon as
more air invades from above and makes it vibrate; just as the empty
vessels I was talking about a moment ago resound when someone
shouts into them.”
(20.1) Let us move on now to those who have said that all the
factors I have described, or several of them, are responsible. Democri-
tus thinks several are.29 For he says that earthquakes are sometimes
produced by breath, sometimes by water, sometimes by both, and he
continues, “Some part of the earth is hollow; a great quantity of water
flows into it. Part of this is light, and runnier than the rest. This is
forced back when dense stuff arrives on top of it, and it crashes against
the earth and makes it quake; for it cannot form waves without shak-
ing what it dashes against.” (2) Also what we were saying about breath
should be applied to water too: “When it has accumulated in one
spot, and there is no room for any more, it presses in one direction,
opening up a path first with its weight, then with its momentum. For
it cannot escape except downward, having been confined for a long
time, and it cannot fall vertically in a controlled manner or without
shaking what it falls through or onto. (3) Once it has begun being
swept along, if at some point it halts, and the powerful current turns
back on itself, it is forced back against the surrounding earth and
attacks it where it is most unstable. Sometimes, too, when the earth
becomes sodden as water penetrates deeply, it subsides, and its foun-
dations are weakened. Then it gives way at the point where the weight
of the sinking waters is most intense. (4) Sometimes breath drives the
waves on, and if it blows very violently, it causes an earthquake in the
region into which it pushes the massed water. Sometimes the breath
hurtles into passages in the earth, and as it tries to find a way out, it
makes everything shake. Also the earth can be penetrated by winds;
and breath is too fine to be kept out and too violent to be endured
when it is excited and fast-moving.”
(5) Epicurus says that all these causes can operate,30 and he tries
out several others, criticizing those who have declared that just one
of them is the cause, since it is difficult to guarantee certainty about
topics that have to be pursued by conjecture. (6) “Therefore,” he says,book six
104
“water can cause an earthquake if it has washed away and eroded
parts of the earth which, once worn away, leave the earth no longer
able to support the weight it could when they were intact. The impact
of breath can cause earthquakes: perhaps the air is disturbed when
more air enters from outside; perhaps when part of the earth sud-
denly collapses, it causes a shock that sets the air in motion. Perhaps
part of the earth is supported by some columns and piers, as it were,
and when they are weakened and worn away, the weight placed on
them shakes. (7) Perhaps some hot breath that has turned to fire, like
a lightning-bolt, moves forward, causing serious damage to anything
in its path. Perhaps some breeze sets marshy, stagnant water moving,
and then either the impact shakes the earth, or the agitation of the
breath grows with its own movement, spurs itself on, and travels from
the depths right up to the surface.” But he thinks that no cause of
motion is more important than breath.
(21.1) We too think it is breath that is capable of such great initia-
tives. There is nothing more powerful in nature, nothing more dy-
namic; without it not even the most violent things have any strength:
breath ignites fire; water, if you take away the wind, is static, and only
starts moving when a gust of wind propels it. Wind can break up
great stretches of the earth, can raise up new mountains from below,
and can establish in the middle of the sea islands that have not been
seen before. Thera, and Therasia, and the island that was formed in
the Aegean sea in our own day as sailors watched31—who doubts that
breath brought them into the light of day?
(2) There are two kinds of earthquake, according to Posidonius.32
Each has its own name: one is a shock from below, when the earth
shakes and moves up and down; the other is a tilting motion, in
which it rocks from side to side like a ship. I think there is also a third
kind, denoted by our own term:33 for with good reason our ancestors
spoke of an earth tremor, which is different from the other two; for in
it things are not shaken from below, nor tilted from side to side, but
tremble, which in such cases causes very little damage, just as <***>.34
Tilting motion is much more destructive than a shock: for unless a
swift movement in the opposite direction occurs rapidly, to restore
what has tilted to one side, collapse inevitably follows.
(22.1) Since these kinds of movement are different from each
other, their causes are dissimilar too. So let us deal with the shaking105
On Earthquakes
movement first. Whenever large loads are pulled through the streets
<on a line> of several vehicles, and the wheels fall really heavily into
potholes, you will feel the buildings shaking. (2) Asclepiodotus35 re-
ports that when a boulder broke off the side of a mountain and
crashed down, nearby buildings collapsed in the tremor. The same
can happen below the ground: some overhanging rock becomes de-
tached and falls into a cavern below with great momentum and noise,
and with greater violence the heavier it is or the further it falls; and
thus the entire roof of the hollow depression is shaken. (3) It is also
plausible not only that rocks are broken off by their own weight, but
also, when rivers flow above them, the constant moisture weakens the
joints in the stone, and day by day removes some of what the stone
is attached to, and wears away the glue, so to speak, by which it is
fastened. Then over a long period the protracted attrition so weakens
what it has been eroding day by day that it ceases to be capable of
load-bearing. (4) Then rocks of enormous weight fall down; then a
collapsing cliff, allowing no obstacle that it hits to remain standing,
“falls with a crash, and suddenly everything seems to collapse,” as
our Virgil says.36
(23.1) That will be the explanation of earthquakes that shake from
below. I move on to the second sort. The texture of the earth is loose,
with a lot of spaces. Breath travels through these gaps, and when
it enters in greater quantity and is not released, it shakes the earth.
(2) Other people too agree with this explanation, as I said a short
while ago.37 If a mass of witnesses is going to make any impression
on you, this view is also accepted by Callisthenes,38 a far from insig-
nificant man; for he had a noble intellect, one that would not tolerate
an insane king. This is an undying accusation against Alexander, for
which no courage, no success in war will atone: whenever someone
says, “He killed many thousands of Persians,” there will be a protest
about Callisthenes; whenever it is said, “He killed Darius, who at
that time ruled a mighty kingdom,” there will be a protest about Cal-
listhenes; whenever it is said, “He conquered everything as far as the
ocean, and made an attempt on that too with fleets not seen before,
and extended his empire from a corner of Thrace to the boundaries
of the east,” someone will say, “But he killed Callisthenes.” He may
have surpassed every precedent set by generals and kings, but of his
achievements, none will be as great as a crime. (4) This Callisthenes,book six
106
in the books where he describes the inundation of Helice and Buris,39
and the event that drove them into the sea, or the sea onto them, says
what has already been said in an earlier section:40 “Breath enters the
earth through invisible openings; this happens everywhere, includ-
ing under the sea. Then, when the pathway through which it had
been descending is blocked, and the pressure of the water behind
prevents its return, it oscillates backward and forward, and as it col-
lides with itself, it weakens the earth. That is why places next to the
sea are ravaged most often, and for that reason the power to cause
earthquakes has been assigned to Neptune. Anyone who has learned
to read knows that in Homer he is called Enosichthon.”41
(24.1) I too agree that breath is the cause of this disastrous phe-
nomenon. What I shall dispute is the way in which the breath enters:
whether it is through fine passageways that are not visible to the eye,
or through larger, broader ones, and whether it comes from deep
below, or also through the earth’s surface. (2) The latter is incredible.
For in our bodies too the skin repels breath, and it has no way in
except where it is inhaled. And once it is taken in, it cannot settle
except in a more loose-knit part of the body; for it is retained not
in the sinews or flesh, but among the vital organs, in a broad cavity
inside us. (3) One may perhaps suspect the same about the earth,
simply because earthquakes occur not on the earth’s surface or near
the surface, but beneath, and far below. There is evidence of this
in the fact that extremely deep seas are disturbed, evidently because
there is a quake in the earth above which they extend. So it is likely
that the earth quakes deep below, and breath is gathered in huge
caverns down there. (4) “That is not right,” someone says. “When
we shudder with cold, shivering results, and in just the same way the
earth too is shaken by breath assailing it from outside.” That is quite
impossible. For the earth needs to be cold to undergo the same as
we do when an external cause makes us shudder. I would grant that
the earth does undergo something similar to our own experience, but
not from a similar cause. (5) An internal, deeper injury must afflict the
earth, and perhaps the most significant evidence for this is that, when
in a violent earthquake there is vast subsidence, and the ground opens
up, sometimes entire cities are swallowed and buried in the chasm.
(6) Thucydides says that around the time of the Peloponnesian war
all, or at least most, of the island of Atalante sank.42 Take Posidonius’s107
On Earthquakes
word for it that the same happened at Sidon.43 But there is no need
for witnesses on this point: for we can remember that when the earth
was torn apart by an internal quake, whole areas were broken up, and
fields disappeared. I shall now say how I think this occurs.
(25.1) When with great force breath has completely filled an
empty space in the earth and has started to struggle and to think of
escape, it repeatedly strikes the sides of the space where it is lurking;
and sometimes cities are situated above them. The sides are some-
times shaken so much that buildings overhead collapse, sometimes so
much that the walls supporting the entire roof of the cavern fall down
into the empty space below, and entire cities sink to a great depth.
(2) Should you be inclined to believe it, they say that once Ossa was
attached to Olympus; then it was separated by an earthquake, and the
huge mass of the single mountain was split into two. The Peneus then
flowed out, drying up the marshes with which Thessaly was afflicted,
as it drew into itself the waters that had collected in the absence of
an exit. The river Ladon is midway between Elis and Megalopolis,
and an earthquake caused it to flow. (3) What do I want to prove
with all this? That breath gathers in roomy caves (what else should
I call empty spaces beneath the earth?). If this were not so, large
tracts of the earth would be shaken, and many places would tremble
simultaneously; but as it is, tiny portions of the earth suffer, and the
quake never extends as much as two hundred miles. Just consider:
this recent one that has filled the earth with stories did not spread
beyond Campania. (4) Do I need to say that when Chalcis shook,
Thebes stood still? that when Aegium suffered, Patrae, so close to it,
merely heard about the earthquake? That great convulsion in which
two cities disappeared, Helice and Buris, stopped short of Aegium.
So it is clear that the earthquake spreads as far as the hollowness of
the empty space extends beneath the earth.
(26.1) To prove this, I could have exploited the authority of dis-
tinguished men who record that Egypt has never experienced trem-
ors. The explanation they give for this is that the whole country has
been formed from mud. For if Homer can be trusted,44 Pharos used
to be as far from the mainland as a ship can travel in a day under
full sail. But the island has been brought close to the mainland: for
the Nile, with its muddy current, carrying lots of silt with it and
continually depositing it on the existing land, has constantly beenbook six
108
enlarging Egypt with an annual supplement. So the land is made
of rich, muddy soil and has no gaps in it. It has solidified with the
drying out of the mud, whose composition was densely packed and
settled, since its parts were glued together, and no empty space could
appear between them, since liquid, soft matter constantly accumu-
lated on top of the solid.
(2) However, Egypt does have earthquakes, and so does Delos,
which Virgil commanded to stand still: “and he granted it to be
inhabited without being shaken, and to despise the winds.”45 Phi-
losophers too, a credulous race, have said that it does not have earth-
quakes, on the authority of Pindar.46 Thucydides says that earlier it
was unaffected,47 but it was shaken around the time of the Pelopon-
nesian war. (3) Callisthenes says that this occurred on another occa-
sion too:48 “Among the many prodigies,” he says, “that heralded the
destruction of the two cities, Helice and Buris, the most notable were
an immense fiery column and an earthquake on Delos.” He thinks it
is regarded as immovable because it is in the middle of the sea and
has hollow cliffs and permeable rocks such as allow trapped air to get
out again; for this reason, islands generally have firmer soil, and cities
are safer the nearer they are to the sea. (4) Pompeii and Herculaneum
have discovered that this is untrue. Add that every sea shore is prone
to earthquakes: thus Paphos has been destroyed more than once, and
Nicopolis, which is unstable and now familiar with this catastrophe;
Cyprus is surrounded by deep sea and yet has earthquakes; and Tyre
itself both has earthquakes and is lapped by the sea.
Such are the explanations given for the earth’s trembling.
(27.1) But some particular events are reported to have occurred in this
Campanian earthquake, and they require explanation. They say that a
flock of hundreds of sheep was killed in the Pompeii area. (2) There
is no reason for you to think this happened to those sheep because
of fear: we have said that a plague commonly occurs after major
earthquakes,49 and this is not surprising. For many causes of death
are lurking deep below: the air itself can be unhealthy for those who
breathe it, either through a defect in the earth, or because the air is
stagnating inertly in perpetual darkness, or because of contamination
by the corrupting effects of subterranean fires. When it emerges from
its long decay, it infects and pollutes our pure, clear atmosphere, and
when people inhale this unfamiliar breath, it causes new kinds of109
On Earthquakes
disease. (3) What about the presence deep below of water too that is
unusable and plague-ridden, since it is never disturbed by use, never
stirred up by a fresh breeze? So this murky water, covered in dense,
perpetual darkness, contains solely what is intrinsically deadly and
inimical to our bodies. Also, the air that is mixed with that water and
settles among those marshes, when it emerges, broadcasts its infec-
tion far and wide, and kills those who breathe it. (4) Plague often
attacks animals first, and they feel the effects more easily the greedier
they are: they especially enjoy the open air and the water supplies
that are particularly responsible for plagues. Sheep have a weaker
constitution, and they carry their heads closer to the ground, so I
am not surprised that they were struck down, since they inhaled the
currents of poisonous air near ground level. This would have harmed
humans too if it had emerged in greater quantity; but the plentiful
supply of pure air overwhelmed it before it could rise high enough
to be breathed by humans.
(28.1) You may infer that the earth contains many deadly sub-
stances just from the fact that so many poisons grow in it, not because
sown by human hand, but spontaneously. This must be because the
soil contains harmful seeds as well as beneficial ones. And consider
this: in several places in Italy an unhealthy vapor, safe for neither
humans nor wild animals to inhale, is given off through certain pas-
sageways. Birds too, if they fly into it before it has been tempered
by the more wholesome atmosphere, drop dead in mid flight; their
bodies are discolored, and their necks swollen, just as if they had
been strangled. (2) This breath, so long as it remains in the earth,
flows through a narrow aperture and has only enough power to kill
things that look down into it and enter it of their own accord; but
when it has been hidden for centuries and has grown in virulence in
the darkness and the grim conditions, it becomes more concentrated
with the passage of time and more dangerous the more sluggish it
is. When it finds an exit, it pours out that everlasting poison formed
in the gloomy cold, that hellish contagion, and it darkens the air in
our world. For the better is overcome by the worse. (3) Then even
the purer breath becomes infectious; then there is one sudden death
after another, and there are hideous forms of disease, for they spring
from new causes. The disaster is short-lived or long-lasting according
to the strength of the infection, and the plague does not end untilbook six
110
the spaciousness of the atmosphere and the action of the winds has
dispersed that oppressive breath.
(29.1) A number of people ran off as though mad or stupefied:
this was the result of fear, which causes mental disturbance when it is
private and moderate; so what happens when there is terror on a pub-
lic scale? When cities are collapsing, peoples are being destroyed, and
the earth is quaking, is it surprising that minds deprived of support in
the midst of grief and fear became deranged? (2) It is not easy to stay
sane in the midst of great disasters. So the weakest temperaments
generally reach such a pitch of terror that they lose their heads. No
one can panic without some loss of sanity, and anyone who is afraid
resembles a madman. But fear soon restores some people to their
normal selves, while it disturbs others more deeply and drives them
mad. (3) That is why in time of war people wander around distraught,
and nowhere will you find more cases of people prophesying than
when panic blended with religion has attacked their minds.
(30.1) I am not surprised that a statue was split apart, for I have
said that mountains have separated from mountains, and the ground
itself has been torn apart from the depths:
They say that once these regions, convulsed by violence and
wide devastation,
(long aeons of time can cause so much change)
sprang apart, although to begin with both the lands
were one. The ocean came with mighty force and split
the huge flank of Hesperia50 from the flank of Sicily, and ran in
a narrow strait
between fields and cities that were separated by the sea.51
(2) You can see whole regions torn up from their foundations and
what had been next door lying across the sea; you can see cities
and nations rent apart when one section of nature is stirred up and
violently displaces sea, fire, or breath. The power is amazing since it
comes from the whole universe: even if it rages only in part, it rages
with the power of the world. (3) Thus the sea also severed the Spanish
provinces from their union with Africa;52 thus Sicily was wrenched
away from Italy in that inundation celebrated by the greatest poets.111
On Earthquakes
Forces that come from deep down have considerably more power, for
struggling through constrictions makes things more violent.
(4) Enough has been said about the powerful effects and the
amazing sights produced by these earthquakes. So why is anyone
astonished that the bronze of a single statue, which is not even solid,
but hollow and thin, was split apart? Perhaps breath that was look-
ing for a way out became shut up in it? Also, as everybody knows,
we have seen buildings whose corners had been pulled apart get
shaken and put back together again. Some buildings that had rather
inadequate foundations, and had been put up in a rather careless and
slapdash way by the builders, have had their structure strengthened
by repeated shaking in the earthquake! (5) Now if it cracks whole
walls and whole houses and fractures the sides of great towers, how-
ever solid they are, and shatters supporting piers, why should anyone
think it worthy of notice that a statue was evenly cut into two sec-
tions from head to foot?
(31.1) Why did the earthquake last several days? Campania did
not stop experiencing constant tremors, which were gentler, but still
very destructive, because they were shaking things that had already
been shaken, things that were standing precariously and did not need
a push, but only a vibration, to make them fall. Clearly not all the
breath had yet escaped, and though most had emerged, some was
still milling around. Among the arguments proving that the cause of
earthquakes is breath, you should not hesitate to include this as well:
(2) when there has been a very powerful earthquake in which cities
and regions have been savaged, there cannot immediately be another
one equal to it; instead, after the very powerful one there are weak
tremors, because the more violent force has already created an exit
for the struggling winds. The residue of the remaining breath is not
as powerful, and does not need to fight, since it has already found a
route and is following where the first, most powerful force escaped.
(3) I think the following also deserves to be recorded, something
experienced by a very learned and very distinguished man, who hap-
pened to be in the bath when it occurred: he declares that he saw the
pieces of mosaic covering the floor in the bathroom move apart from
each other and come together again, and the water one moment be-
ing drawn into the cracks as the paving parted, the next being forcedbook six
112
out, bubbling, as it was pushed together again. I also heard him say-
ing that he saw walls shaking more flexibly and more frequently than
the nature of solid things permits.
(32.1) So much for explanations, Lucilius, excellent man: now
for what serves to reassure our minds, since it is more important to
us that they become more courageous than that they become better
educated. But you cannot have the one without the other. The mind
gains strength solely from liberal studies and from the contemplation
of nature. (2) For whom will this disaster not make more resolute,
more defiant, against all others? Why should I tremble at a human
being or a wild beast, or at an arrow or a spear? Greater dangers are
waiting for me: we are the targets of lightning-bolts, of the earth,
and of large segments of nature. (3) So we must challenge death with
great courage, whether it attacks us with a cruel, large-scale assault, or
with an ordinary, everyday exit. It does not matter how menacingly it
comes and how great the forces it deploys against us—what it is ask-
ing of us is insignificant. Old age will take it from us, so will a simple
earache, so will the spread of an infection in our body, so will food
that disagrees with our stomach, so will a slight injury to the foot.
(4) A person’s soul is a trivial thing, but contempt for one’s soul
is a tremendous thing. Anyone who treats it with contempt will
watch the seas in turmoil without anxiety, even if all the winds have
whipped them up, even if through some disturbance to the world the
tide is diverting the entire ocean onto the land. He will look without
anxiety at the cruel, dreadful sight of the sky flashing with lightning,
even if the sky is fractured and is concocting fires that will destroy
everything, starting with itself.53 He will look without anxiety at the
ground gaping open as its structure shatters, even if the kingdoms
of the underworld were to be revealed. He will stand above that
abyss unflinching and perhaps will leap in where he will have to fall.
(5) What is it to me how great are the causes of my death? Death
itself is not a great thing. So if we wish to be happy, not to be racked
by fear of humans, or gods, or circumstances; to despise fortune,
whose promises are unnecessary and whose threats are insubstantial;
if we wish to have a tranquil existence and to compete with the gods
themselves in happiness, then we must keep our soul ready. Whether
plots or diseases attack it, whether the swords of enemies or of citi-
zens, whether the crash of falling blocks of flats, whether the collapse113
On Earthquakes
of the earth itself, or a huge, powerful fire that embraces cities and
farmland in the same devastation, whatever disaster wishes to receive
our soul, let it do so. (6) What else do I need to do but encourage my
soul on its way out and send it off with good omens? “Go bravely,
go with good fortune! Do not hesitate: you are being given back.
There is no question about the fact, only about the timing; you are
doing what must be done sooner or later. Do not ask anything, do
not be afraid, do not turn back as though you are going to face some-
thing evil. Nature, which gave birth to you, is waiting for you; so
is a better, safer, place. (7) There the earth does not tremble, nor do
winds collide with each other with loud crashing of clouds; fires do
not devastate regions and cities. There is no fear of shipwrecks that
swallow up whole fleets, no weapons arrayed beneath the standards
on opposing sides, when the same madness afflicts many thousands
bent on mutual destruction, no plague with communal funeral pyres
burning anonymously for dying nations. Suppose death is trivial: why
are we afraid? Suppose it is serious: rather let it happen once and
for all than constantly hang over us. (8) Should I be afraid of dying,
when the earth dies before I do, when what shakes is shaken, when
it harms itself in the process of harming us? The sea claimed Helice
and Buris in their entirety: should I fear for one insignificant body?
People sail above the two towns, that is two that we know about, that
records preserved in literature have brought to our knowledge: how
many more towns have been submerged in other places, how many
nations has either the land or the sea trapped beneath it! Should I
protest at my own ending, when I know that my existence is not
endless? Or indeed, when I know that everything has an end, should
I be afraid of my final gasp?”
(9) So, Lucilius, as far as you are able, exhort yourself against the
fear of death. This fear is what demeans us; this is what disturbs and
ruins the very life it spares; this exaggerates it all, the earthquakes
and the lightning-bolts. You will face all that without flinching if
you consider that there is no difference between a short time and a
long one. (10) What we lose are only hours. Suppose they are days,
suppose they are months, suppose they are years: we lose them, but
they are going to be lost anyway. What difference does it make, I ask
you, whether I live that long? Time flows on and abandons those
who are greediest for it. Neither what will be nor what has been is inbook six
114
my possession. I am suspended on a point of fleeting time; and yet
it takes a great man to be moderate in his demand for time! (11) The
wise Laelius,54 when someone said, “I’ve got sixty years to my credit,”
replied rather neatly, “You’re talking about sixty years you haven’t
got!” Even when we see that we are counting the years we have lost,
can we still not understand that our life is essentially something we
cannot cling on to, that the time allocated to us is never in our pos-
session? (12) Let us imprint this on our minds, let us constantly say
this to ourselves: “We must die.” When? What does that matter to
you? How? What does that matter to you? Death is a law of nature;
death is the tribute and duty of mortals, and the remedy for every
suffering. Anyone who is afraid is longing for it. Forget everything
else, Lucilius, and concentrate on this one thing, on not being afraid
of the word “death.” By constant reflection make death a friend of
yours, so that, if it allows, you can go out to meet it.